projects and hobbies--life in india--lord clyde and sir james
outram--the position and physical geography of the somali country--the
nogal country, and historical sketches--costume and customs.



it was in the year 1849, at the expiration of the punjaub campaign,
under lord gough, where i had been actively engaged as a subaltern
officer in the (so-called) fighting brigade of general sir colin
campbell's division of the army, adding my mite to the four successive
victorious actions--ramnugger, sadoolapore, chillianwallah, and
guzerat--that i first conceived the idea of exploring central
equatorial africa. my plan was made with a view to strike the nile at
its head, and then to sail down that river to egypt. it was conceived,
however, not for geographical interest, so much as for a view i had in
my mind of collecting the fauna of those regions, to complete and
fully develop a museum in my father's house, a nucleus of which i had
already formed from the rich menageries of india, the himalaya
mountains, and tibet. my idea in selecting the new field for my future
researches was, that i should find within it various orders and
species of animals hitherto unknown. although major cornwallis harris,
ruppell, and others had by this time well-nigh exhausted, by their
assiduous investigations, all discoveries in animal life, both in the
northern and southern extremities of africa, in the lowlands of
kaffraria in the south, and the highlands of ethiopia in the north, no
one as yet had penetrated to the centre in the low latitudes near the
equator; and by latitudinal differences i thought i should obtain new
descriptions and varieties of animals. further, i imagined the
mountains of the moon were a vast range, stretching across africa from
east to west, which in all probability would harbour wild goats and
sheep, as the himalaya range does. there, too, i thought i should find
the nile rising in snow, as does the ganges in the himalayas.

the time i proposed to myself for carrying this scheme into operation
was my furlough--a lease of three years' leave of absence, which i
should become entitled to at the expiration of ten years' service in
india; but i would not leave the reader to infer that i intended
devoting the whole of my furlough to this one pursuit alone. two of
the three years were to be occupied in collecting animals, and
descending by the valley of the nile to egypt and england, whilst the
third year was to be spent in indulgent recreations at home after my
labours should be over.

i had now served five years in the indian army, and five years were
left to serve ere i should become entitled to take my furlough. during
this time i had to consider two important questions: how i should be
able, out of my very limited pay as a subaltern officer, to meet the
heavy expenditure which such a vast undertaking would necessarily
involve? and how, before leaving india, i might best employ any local
leave i could obtain, in completing my already commenced collections
of the fauna of that country and its adjacent hill-ranges?[1]

previous experience had taught me that, in the prosecution of my chief
hobby, i would also solve the problem of the most economical mode of
living. in the backwoods and jungles no ceremony or etiquette provokes
unnecessary expenditure; whilst the fewer men and material i took with
me on my sporting excursions the better sport i always got, and the
freer and more independent i was to carry on the chase. i need now
only say i acted on this conviction, and i think, i may add, i managed
it successfully; for there are now but few animals to be found in
either india, tibet, or the himalaya mountains, specimens of which
have not fallen victims to my gun. of this the paternal hall is an
existing testimony. every year after the war i obtained leave of
absence, and every year i marched across the himalayas, and penetrated
into some unknown portions of tibet, shooting, collecting, and mapping
the country wherever i went. my mess-mates wondered how it was i
succeeded in getting so much leave; but the reason was simply this,
and i tell it that others may profit by it:--the commander-in-chief,
sir william gomm, observing to what good account i always turned my
leave, instead of idling my time away, or running into debt, took
great pleasure in encouraging my hobby; and his staff were even heard
to say it would be a pity if i did not get leave, as so much good
resulted from it.

the 3d september 1854 completed my tenth year's servitude in india,
and on the succeeding day, the 4th, i embarked on board one of the p.
and o. company's steamers at calcutta, and left the indian shore for
aden; but previously to my departure i purchased various cheap
articles of barter, all as tempting and seductive as i could find, for
the simple-minded negroes of africa. these consisted principally of
cheap guns, revolving pistols, swords, cheap cutlery of all sorts,
beads, cotton stuffs of a variety of kinds, and sewing material, &c.
&c. &c., to the amount of l390 sterling. arrived at aden, my first
step was to visit colonel outram, the political resident, to open my
views to him with regard to penetrating africa, and to solicit his
assistance to my doing so, by granting introductory letters to the
native chiefs on the coast, and in any other manner that he could. but
to my utter astonishment and discomfiture, with the frank and
characteristic ardour which has marked him through life, he at once
said he would not only withhold his influence, but would prohibit my
going there at all, as the countries opposite to aden were so
extremely dangerous for any foreigners to travel in, that he
considered it his duty as a christian to prevent, as far as he was
able, anybody from hazarding his life there. this opposition,
fortunately, only lasted for a time. after repeated supplications on
my part, the generous kind nature of the colonel overcame him, and he
thought of a pretext by which, should anything serious happen to me,
there would not remain any onus on his conscience.

the bombay government at that time had been induced to order an
expedition to be organised for the purpose of investigating the somali
country--a large tract of land lying due south of aden, and separated
only from the arabian coast by the gulf of aden--and had appointed
three officers, lieutenant burton to command, and lieutenants stroyan
and herne to assist in its conduct. to this project colonel outram had
ever been adverse, and he had remonstrated with the government about
it, declaring, as his opinion, the scheme to be quite unfeasible. the
somali, he said, were the most savage of all african savages, and were
of such a wild and inhospitable nature that no stranger could possibly
live amongst them. the government, however, relying on the ability of
one who made the pilgrimage of mecca, were bent at least on giving the
lieutenant a chance of showing what he could do in this even darker
land, and he was then occupied in aden maturing his plans of
procedure.[2]

this, then, was the opportunity the colonel took advantage of,
advising me to ask lieutenant burton to incorporate me in his
expedition, at the same time saying that, if it was found to be
agreeable to lieutenant burton, he would back my application to the
indian government, obtain a cancel of my furlough, and get me put on
service-duty as a member of the expedition.

nothing could have suited me better, as it brought me on service
again, and so saved my furlough leave for a future exploration.
lieutenant burton consented, and i was at once installed in the
expedition. my travelling, mapping,[3] and collecting propensities, it
was thought would be of service to the ends of the expedition; and by
my being incorporated in it, there would be no chance of my running
counter to it, by travelling on its line of march, and possibly giving
rise to disturbances with the natives.

before proceeding further in the narrative of events as they occurred,
it may be as well, perhaps, to anticipate a little, and give a general
impression of the geography, ethnology, history, and other
characteristics of the country under investigation--the somali
land--and the way in which it was intended that those investigations
should be carried out. as will appear by the following pages, my
experiences were mostly confined to the north central parts, in the
highlands of the warsingali and dulbahanta tribes. the rest of my
information is derived from conversations with the natives, or what i
have read in some very interesting pages in vol. xix. of the
'transactions of the royal geographical society,' written by
lieutenant cruttenden.

the somali country is an elbow of land lying between the equator and
the 11th degree of north latitude, which, from its peculiar form,
might well be designated the eastern horn of africa. the land is high
in the north, and has a general declination, as may be seen by the
river system, to the south and eastward, but with less easting as we
come westward.

it is separated from the main body of africa by the river jub, a large
and fertilising stream, which, rising in the mountains of southern
abyssinia, passes between the territories of the gallas on the west
and the somali on the east, and debouches in the indian ocean at the
northern extremity of the zanzibar coast. according to lieutenant
cruttenden's map, there are only two other rivers besides this of any
consequence in the land,--the webbe (river) shebeli, or haines river,
which is of considerable importance, having a large flow of water,
trending down a cultivable district of rich red soil, and another less
important to the eastward of these two, called very unfortunately by
him the wadi[4] nogal. the proper specific name for this river has
never, to my knowledge, been given; but the jid ali tug is one of its
head branches. it rises in some small hills close overhanging the
north coast, and runs south-easterly into the indian ocean, dividing
two large territories, called ugahden, or haud, on the west, and nogal
on the east, mouthing at ras ul khyle. ugahden is said to be a flat
grassy country, of red soil, almost stoneless, and having water
everywhere near the surface. it is considered by the pastoral somali a
famous place for keeping cattle, of which by report they possess a
great abundance, such as camels, ponies, cows, and dumba sheep--a
fat-tailed animal, like the persian breed. game also abounds in this
country, of which the gazelles and antelopes, i was assured, roamed
about in vast herds like sheep.

the nogal country is the opposite of this, containing nothing of any
material value in it. the rock-formation is all lime, very pure and
white like marble, which consequently makes the soil white, and, being
very stony, it is almost barren. the somali keep cattle here, but with
much apparent difficulty, being, from the scarcity of springs and want
of water, obliged to march about, following the last falls of rain, to
obtain fresh herbage for their cattle. my first and greater journey
gave me an insight into this portion of the interior of the country
south of bunder gori. it was very interesting, though not profitable,
from its never having been visited by any europeans before. i observed
here two distinct leading features in its physical geography. the
first is a narrow hill-range, about 180 miles long and 20 or more
broad, which is occupied by two large tribes--the warsingali on the
east, and a branch of the habr gerhajis on the west. it is situated at
an average distance of from 200 yards to three or four miles from the
sea-shore, separated from it by a sandy flat or maritime plain, and,
like the line of coast, extends from east to west. immediately due
south of bunder gori, the sea-face, or northern slopes of this range,
are very steep and irregular, being trenched down by deep ravines,
which, during the rainy season, shed their water across the maritime
plain into the gulf of aden.

the lower folds on this side of the range are composed of brown rocks
and earth, having little or no vegetation upon them, and are just as
uninviting in appearance as the light-brown hills which fringe the
coast of arabia, as seen by voyagers on the red sea. further up the
hill, in the central folds of the range, this great sterility changes
for a warm rich clothing of bush-jungle and a little grass. gum-trees,
myrrh, and some varieties of the frankincense are found in great
profusion, as well as a variety of the aloe plant, from which the
somali manufacture good strong cordage. the upper part of the range is
very steep and precipitous, and on this face is well clad with trees
and bush-jungle. the southern side of the range is exactly the
opposite, in all its characteristics, of the northern. instead of
having a steep drop of from 6000 to 7000 feet, it falls by gentle
slopes to successive terraces, like a giant staircase, to scarcely
half that depth, where it rests at the head of the high plateau land
of nogal, and is almost barren. nogal, as i have said before, is also
very barren, only producing trees, such as the hardy acacia and
jujube, in sheltered places, in the valleys or watercourses which
drain that land to the south-east. i had no means of determining it,
but should judge this second great geographical feature, the plateau
of nogal, by the directions its streams lie in, to have a gradual
decreasing declination, like all the rest of the interior, from the
north, where it averages an altitude of from 3000 to 4000 feet, down
to the level of the sea on south and by east.

according to traditional histories furnished me by the natives who
accompanied me on the journeys i undertook, it appears that the
present somali are of rather recent origin, not more than four and a
half centuries old. about the year 1413, an arab chieftain,
darud-bin-ismail, who had been disputing with an elder brother for
certain territorial rights at mecca, was overpowered and driven from
the mussulman holy land, and marched southwards, accompanied by a
large number of faithful followers,--amongst whom was an asyri damsel,
of gentle blood and interesting beauty, whom he subsequently
married,--to makallah, on the southern shores of arabia. once arrived
there, this band of vanquished fugitives hired vessels, and, crossing
the gulf of aden, came to bunder gori. here they were hospitably
received by the then governing people, who, for the most part, were
christians--probably gallas and abyssinians--who, judging from the few
archaeological remains they subsequently left behind them, must have
lived in a far more advanced state of civilisation than the present
somali enjoy. those christian people were governed by one man, sultan
kin, who had a deputy called wurrah, renowned alike for his ferocity
of character and his ability to govern.

for some years darud and his arab followers led a quiet, peaceable
life, gaining the confidence of his host, and inspiring kin's subjects
with reverence for their superior talents. in process of time, by
intermarriage and proselytising, these mussulmans increased in number,
and gained such strength, that they began to covet, and finally
determined to take the country from the race that had preceded them.
this project, by various intrigues and machinations, was easily
effected; and kin, with all his christians, was driven back to his
native highlands in ethiopia.[5] darud now was paramount in all this
land, and reigned until he died, when an only son by his asyri wife
succeeded to him. this man's name was kabl ullah, who had a son called
harti. on succeeding his father, harti had three sons, called
respectively, in order of birth, warsingali, dulbahanta, and
mijjertaine. amongst these three he divided his kingdom, which to this
day retains the names. the mijjertaine dispersed over the eastern
portions of the land, the warsingali held the central, and the
dulbahantas the western territories.[6]

subsequently to this period, an arab called ishak came across from
southern arabia and established himself forcibly at meit, and founded
the three different nations who now occupy all the coast-line from ras
galweni on the eastward to zeyleh on the extreme west of the somali
country. ishak, it appears, had three wives, who gave in issue three
sons, and among these three men was divided the whole country which he
subdued.

forming themselves into tribes, the senior or habr gerhajis, by
constant feuds and other causes, are much distributed about the
country, but mostly occupy the hilly grounds to the southward of the
coast-line; whilst the habr owel, or second in order of birth, possess
all the coast of berbera between zeyleh and kurrum; and the third, or
habr teljala, hold all the rest thence eastwards to heis.

the somali have been chiefly known to us since the time of our taking
occupation of aden, whither many of them resort with their wives and
families to carry on trade, or do the more menial services of
porterage and donkey-driving. they are at once easily recognised by
the overland traveller by their singular appearance and boisterous
manner, as well as by their cheating and lying propensities, for which
they are peculiarly notorious; indeed, success in fraud is more
agreeable to them than any other mode of gaining a livelihood, and the
narration of such acts is their greatest delight in conversation. they
excel as donkey-boys even the egyptians. as may be concluded from
their history, they are a mixed ham-shemitic race, but differing
considerably from both in their general appearance, though retaining
certain characteristics of both these breeds. they are a tall, slender
people, light and agile as deer; slightly darker than, though much the
colour of arabs, with thin lip, and noses rather grecian when compared
with those of blacks, but with woolly heads like the true negroes.
their natures are so boisterous and warlike, that at aden it has been
found necessary to disarm them. when they first arrived there, it was
not an unusual sight to see the men of different tribes, on the
hillsides that form the face of the "crater," fighting battles-royal
with their spears and shields; and even to this day, they, without
their arms, sometimes have hot contests, by pelting one another with
sticks and stones. there is scarcely a man of them who does not show
some scars of wounds received in these turmoils, some apparently so
deep that it is marvellous how they ever recovered from them.

their costume is very simple. the men, who despise trousers, wear a
single sheet of long-cloth, eight cubits long, thrown over the
shoulder, much after the fashion of the scotsman's plaid. some shave
their head, leaving it bare; others wear the mane of a lion as a wig,
which is supposed by them to give the character of ferocity and
courage to the wearer, while those who affect the dandy allow their
hair to grow, and jauntily place some sticks in it resembling the
chinaman's joss-sticks, which, when arranging their toilette, they use
as a comb, and all carry as weapons of defence a spear and shield, a
shillelagh, and a long two-edged knife. the women clothe more
extensively, though not much so. fastening a cloth tightly round the
body immediately under their arms, they allow it to fall evenly down
to the ground, and effectually cover their legs. the married ones
encase their hair in a piece of blue cloth, gathering it up at the
back of the head in the fashion of english women of the present day;
this is a sign of wedlock. the virgins wear theirs loose, plaited in
small plaits of three, which, being parted in the centre, allows the
hair to fall evenly down all round the head like a well-arranged mop.
on approaching these fairs, they seductively give their heads a cant
backwards, with a half side-jerk, which parts the locks in front, and
discloses a pretty little smiling face, with teeth as white as pearls,
and lips as red as rubies. pretty as they are when young, this beauty
fades at once after bearing children, and all their fair proportions
go with it. after that marked peculiarity of female negroes, they
swell about the waist, and have that large development behind, which,
in polite language, is called steatopyga. although they are
mussulmans, none wear the yashmac. beads are not so much in request
here as in other parts of africa, though some do wear necklaces of
them, with large rings of amber. this description, however, applies to
the somali in his own land. when he comes over to aden he takes shame
at his nakedness, dons the arab's gown and trousers, and becomes the
merchant complete.[7]

in consequence of the poorness of their land, almost all the somali
are wandering pastorals, which of itself is enough to account for
their turbulent natures. the system of government they maintain is
purely patriarchal, and is succeeded to by order of birth generally in
a regular and orderly manner, attributable, it would appear, to the
reverence they feel for preserving their purity of blood. the head of
each clan is called gerad or sultan, who would be powerless in himself
were he not supported by the united influence of all the royal family.
when any disturbances or great disputes arise, the sultan is
consulted, who collects his elders in parliament to debate the matter
over, and, through them, ascertain the people's feelings. petty
disputes are settled by the elders without any further reference. in
most cases war arises from blood-feuds, when a member of one clan
kills the subject of another, and will not pay the recognised
valuation of the party injured, or allow himself to be given up to the
vengeance of the family who has sustained the loss. in such cases as
these, whole tribes voluntarily march out to revenge the deed by
forcibly taking as many cattle from the aggressor as the market
valuation may amount to.

thus a war, once contracted, does not subside for years, as by
repeated deaths among the contending parties the balance of
blood-money never can be settled. moreover, the inflicted punishment
seldom falls on the party immediately concerned; added to which, in
wars of tribes, everybody helps himself to his enemy's cattle in the
best way he can, and men formerly poor now suddenly become rich, which
gives a zest to the extension of the contest nothing else could
produce. indeed, the poorer orders of somali are only too glad to have
a good pretext for a fight, as a means of bettering their condition,
by adding a few more head of cattle to their stock. were this not the
case, there would be no fighting whatever, as the sultan would be
powerless to raise an army against the inclination of the people. war
only ceases when both sides become exhausted, and withdraw as by
mutual consent. the great object in these encounters is to steal away
as many cattle as possible without risk of person, and such feats are
boasted of with rapture by those returning home with any prize. in the
administration of justice they consult the mosaic law, as given in the
koran, taking life for life, and kind for kind.

the northern somali have no permanent villages in the interior of the
country, as the ground is not cultivated; but they scatter about,
constantly moving with their flocks and herds to any place within
their limited districts where water is to be found, and erect
temporary huts of sticks, covered with grass mats; or, when
favourable, they throw up loose stone walls like the dykes in
scotland. but on the sea-coast, wherever there are harbours for
shipping, they build permanent villages on a very primitive scale.
these are composed of square mat walls, supported by sticks, and all
huddled together, and partitioned off for the accommodation of the
various families, near which there are usually one or more square
box-shaped stone buildings, the property of the chief of the place,
which are designated forts, though there is nothing in their artless
construction to deserve this name. they are all composed of blocks of
coralline, cemented together with mortar extracted from the same
material.

like nearly all places within the tropics, beyond the equatorial rainy
zone, this country is visited by regular monsoons, or seasons in which
the winds prevail constantly in one direction; consequently vessels
can only come into the harbours of the northern coast when the sun is
in the south, or during five months of the year, from the 15th
november to the 15th april, to trade with the people; and then the
somali bring the products of their country, such as sheep, cows, ghee,
mats made by the women from certain grasses and the daum palm, ostrich
feathers, and hides, and settle on the coast to exchange them in
barter with the outer merchants, such as arabs and men from cutch, who
bring thither cloths, dates, rice, beads, and iron for that purpose.

of all the trading places on the coast, the most important is berbera;
it is, in fact, the great emporium of somali land, and we must call
the reader's particular attention to it, since it forms the chief
point of interest in these pages. it is on the same meridian as aden,
and only divided from it by the gulf of that name. although it is of
such great importance, it is only inhabited during the five months of
the favourable monsoon, when great caravans come up from the rich
provinces which lie to its south and south-west, the principal ones
being those from ugahden and harar.

having now given a general sketch of the country, we shall enter upon
the objects of the expedition. it was obvious, by the lay of the land,
that the richest and most interesting part of the country must be that
which lies between the jub and webbe shebeli rivers, and it was the
most accessible to inspection, as large and powerful caravans,
travelling southwards through ugahden, much frequent it. seeing this,
lieutenant burton conceived the idea of waiting until the breaking up
of the berbera fair, when the caravans disperse to their homes, to
travel by the ordinary caravan route, through the ugahden country to
the webbe shebeli, and on to gananah, and then to proceed further by
any favourable opportunity to the zanzibar coast.

it was now, however, early october, and fully five months must elapse
ere we could finally enter on our march. in the mean time, lieutenant
burton, desirous of becoming acquainted as far as possible with the
habits of the people we were destined to travel amongst, as well as
the nature of the country and the modes of travelling in this _terra
incognita_, determined on making an experimental tour to harar, a
place which had never been entered by any european, and was said to be
inaccessible to them. harar, as i have said before, sends caravans
annually to the berbera fair, and therefore comes within the influence
of british power. taking advantage of this, lieutenant burton ordered
herne to go to berbera whilst he was on this expedition, to keep up a
diversion in his favour, arming him with instructions, that in case he
was detained in harar by the amir of that place, herne might detain
their caravan as a ransom for the release of his party.

further, to obtain more accurate knowledge concerning the march of the
ugahden caravans, to gain an insight into the market transactions of
berbera, and to collect cattle for our final march, it was deemed
advisable he should go there. stroyan, as soon as he could manage it,
was also to go to berbera to assist him. thus everybody had a duty to
perform during this interregnum but myself.

dreading the monotony of a station life, i now volunteered to travel
in any direction my commandant might think proper to direct, and to
any length of time he might consider it advisable for me to be away.
this proposition had its effect, as affording an extra opportunity of
obtaining the knowledge desired, and instructions were drawn up for my
guidance. i was to proceed to bunder gori, on the warsingali frontier,
to penetrate the country southwards as far as possible, passing over
the maritime hill-range, and, turning thence westwards, was to inspect
the wadi nogal, and march direct on berbera, to meet stroyan and
herne, at a date not later than the 15th january 1855. whilst
travelling i was to remark upon the watershed of the country, plot the
route i travelled, keep _copious_ notes on everything i saw, and
collect specimens of natural history in all its branches, as well as
observe and register all meteorological phenomena, and buy camels and
ponies for the great future expedition.

funds for the expenses of this undertaking were not available at that
time from the public purse, as the indian government had stipulated
that the whole sum they would advance for this great expedition should
not exceed l1000, and, for security's sake, had decided on paying it
by instalments of l250 at a time. i therefore, desirous to render as
much assistance as lay within my power to further the cause i had
embarked upon, volunteered to advance the necessary sum from my own
private resources, trusting to lieutenant burton's promises in the
future for being repaid.

this project settled, i at once set to work, and commenced laying in
such stores as were necessary for an outfit, whilst lieutenant burton,
who had been long resident in aden, engaged two men to assist me on
the journey. the first was a man named sumunter, who ranked highly in
his country, who was to be my _abban_ or protector. the duty of
abbanship is of the greatest importance, for it rests entirely on the
abban's honesty whether his client can succeed in doing anything in
the country he takes him through. arabs, when travelling under their
protection, have to ask his permission for anything they may wish to
do, and cannot even make a march, or purchase anything, without his
sanction being first obtained. the abban introduces the person under
his protection to the chief of his clan, is answerable for all
outrages committed on the way, and is the recognised go-between in all
questions of dispute or barter, and in every other fashion. the second
man was also a warsingali,[8] by name ahmed, who knew a slight
smattering of hindustani, and acted as interpreter between us. i then
engaged two other men, a hindustani butler named imam, and a seedi
called farhan. this latter man was a perfect hercules in stature, with
huge arms and limbs, knit together with largely developed ropy-looking
muscles. he had a large head, with small eyes, flabby squat nose, and
prominent muzzle filled with sharp-pointed teeth, as if in imitation
of a crocodile. farhan told me that when very young he was kidnapped
on the zanzibar coast by the captain of a small arab vessel. this
captain one day seeing him engaged with many other little children
playing on the sandy seashore, offered him a handful of fine
fruity-looking dates, which proved so tempting to his juvenile taste
that he could not resist the proffered bait, and he made a grab at
them. the captain's powerful fingers then fell like a mighty trap on
his little closed hand, and he was hurried off to the vessel, where he
was employed in the capacity of "powder-monkey." in this position he
remained serving until full grown, when, finding an opportunity, he
ran away from his master, and has ever since lived the life of a
"free-man."

as a soldier, he had been tried in warfare, and was proved valorous
and cunning in the art, and promised to be a very efficient guard for
me. the next thing of most importance to be considered was the dress i
should wear. i first consulted the colonel (outram), who said he was
averse to our going in disguise, thinking that lowering ourselves in
this manner would operate against me in the estimation of the natives.
but this did not suit lieutenant burton's plans, who, not wishing to
be conspicuous whilst travelling to harar, determined on going there
disguised as an arab merchant, and thought it better we should appear
as his disciples, in accordance with which herne had already purchased
his dress, and now i bought mine. it was anything but pleasant to the
feel. i had a huge hot turban, a long close-fitting gown, baggy loose
drawers, drawn in at the ankles, sandals on my naked feet, and a silk
girdle decorated with pistol and dirk. as an outfit for this especial
journey, i bought at aden l120 worth of miscellaneous articles,
consisting chiefly of english and american sheeting, some coarse
fabrics of indigo-dyed indian manufacture, several sacks of dates and
rice, and a large quantity of salt, with a few coloured stuffs of
greater value than the other cloths, to give away as presents to the
native chiefs. as defensible and other useful implements for the
scientific portion of the expedition, i took rifles, guns, muskets,
pistols, sabres, ammunition in great quantity, large commodious
camel-boxes for carrying specimens of natural history, one sextant and
artificial horizon, three boiling-point and common atmospheric
thermometers, and one primitive kind of camera obscure, which i had
made at aden under the ingenious supervision of herne.





                          chapter ii.

the voyage--an akil--the somali shore--sultan (gerad) mahamed
ali--hidden treasure--the warsingali--a royal reception--somali
appetites--difficulties and impediments--sultan tries my abban or
protector.



on the 18th october 1854, having got all my preparations completed, i
embarked in an arab vessel, attired in my oriental costume, with my
retinue and kit complete, and set sail that same evening at 6 p.m.

the voyage, owing to light and varying breezes, was very slow and
tedious. instead of performing the whole voyage in three days, the
ordinary time, it took us nine. according to the method of arab
navigation, instead of going from port to port direct, we first
tracked eastward along the arabian shore three successive days,
setting sail at sunrise, and anchoring regularly at sundown. by this
time we were supposed to be opposite bunder heis, on the somali coast,
and the nahkoda (captain) thought it time for crossing over the gulf.
we therefore put out to sea at sunrise on the morning of the 21st, and
arrived the same evening, by mistake, assisted with a stiffish
easterly breeze, at a small place called rakodah, which, by report,
contained a small fort, three mat huts, and many burnt ones, a little
to the westward of bunder heis. my abban accounted for the destruction
of this place by saying it had been occupied surreptitiously for a
long period by a people called rheer dud, who sprang from a man called
sambur-bin-ishak; but about four years ago, the musa abokr--a
sub-tribe of the habr teljala, who were the former and rightful owners
of the place--suddenly returned, took the usurpers by surprise, and
drove them off by setting fire to the village. the next day, by hard
work, tacking up the wind, which still continued easterly, we
succeeded in reaching bunder heis, which, like the last place, was
occupied by the musa abokr. there were four small craft lying here,
waiting for cargoes, under lee of a spur of low hills which
constituted the harbour; in which, fortunately, there was very good
fishing to be obtained. we were detained here by adverse and light
winds two days, during which time i went on shore and paid my respects
to the akil (chief) of the place, who lived in a small box-shaped
stone fort, on the west flank of the village of heis, which was very
small, composed, as usual, of square mat huts, all built together, and
occupied only by a few women, who made mats, collected gums, and
stored the produce of the interior, as sheep, cows, and ghee, which
their men constantly brought down to them, for shipping off to
arabia.[9] the akil's reception was very warm and polite. he offered
me everything at his disposal, and gave as an honorary present a dumba
sheep and a bowl of sour camel's milk, which i thought at the time the
most delicious thing i ever drank. it is sharp and rough, like
labourers' cider, and, drunk in the heat of the day, is most
refreshing. when first taken, and until the stomach becomes accustomed
to it, it operates like medicine, and i on this occasion was fairly
taken in. the fish we caught were not very good, but comical in
appearance, and of a great variety of the most beautiful prismatic
colours, changing in tint as different lights and shades struck upon
them.

we left heis on the 25th, with very light and unfavourable winds, and
tracked along shore to the eastward, making very little way. the
weather continuing the same, on the 26th i forced the nahkoda, much
against his will, on at night, as during the darker hours the winds
were much stronger, and by this means we arrived at our destination,
bunder gori on the warsingali frontier, at sundown on the 27th of
october. i had now seen the somali shore, and must confess i was much
disappointed. all that was visible, besides the village mentioned, was
a sandy tract of ground, the maritime plain, which extended in breadth
from the sea-shore to some brown-looking hills in the background, from
a few hundred yards to one or two miles distant; and hills and
plains--for i could, by my close approximation to them, only see the
brown folds of the hills near the base--were alike almost destitute of
any vegetation; whilst not one animal or any other living creature
could be seen.

28th october.--the abban would not allow anybody to go on shore until
certain parties came off to welcome us and invite us to land, such
being the etiquette of the country when any big-wigs arrive. after the
sun rose we were duly honoured by the arrival of many half-naked
dignitaries, who tenderly inquired after the state of our health, the
prosperity or otherwise of our voyage, the purpose of our coming
there, and a variety of other such interesting matters. then again
they were questioned by our people as to the state of the country,
whether in peace or war; how and where the sultan gerad mahamed ali
was residing; if rain had lately fallen, and where; if the cattle were
well in milk;--to which it was responded that everything was in the
most promising order; the cattle were flourishing in the hills, where
rain had lately fallen, about twenty miles distant from that place;
and the sultan, with all the royal family,[10] were there, revelling
on milk, under the shade of favouring trees, or reposedly basking in
the warm morning sun--the height of somali bliss. the order was now
given to go ashore, and we all moved off to a fort which the abban
said was his own property, in goriat (little bunder gori), three miles
to the westward of bunder gori. there were two of these little forts
near, and a small collection of mat huts, like those already
described, and of the same material as all somali forts and huts. the
kit was now brought across and placed within the fort i occupied, all
except the salt, which afterwards proved a bone of contention between
me and the abban, and the sultan was at once sent for. no one could
move a yard inland, or purchase anything, without his sanction being
first obtained.

although gerad mahamed ali was living only twenty miles distant from
goriat, it was not until repeated messages had been sent to him, and
eleven days had elapsed, that he answered the summons by his presence.
in the meanwhile, having nothing better to do during this tedious
interval, as no people would bring cattle or anything for sale, i took
walks about the plain, shooting, and killed a new variety of gazelle,
called dera[11] by the somali, and salt's antelopes, here called
sagaro, which fortunately were very abundant, though rather wild;
catching fish, drawing with the camera, bathing in the sea,
luxuriating on milk, dates, and rice, or talking and gossiping with
the natives.

on one occasion my interpreter came to me with a mysterious air, and
whispered in my ear that he knew of some hidden treasures of vast
amount, which had been buried not far off, under rocky ground, in such
a way that nobody had been able to dig them up, and he wished that i,
being an englishman, and consequently knowing secret arts, as well as
_hikmat_ (scientific dodges), would direct how to search for these
treasures. by inquiring farther into the matter, it appeared that an
old man, a miser, who had been hoarding all his life, was suddenly
taken ill about forty years ago, and feared he would die. seeing this,
his relatives assembled round him to ask his blessing; and the old
man, then fearing all his worldly exertions would end to no good
purpose, asked them to draw near that he might tell them where his
riches were hidden; but even then he would not disclose the secret,
until he was in the last dying gasp, when he said, "go to a pathway
lying between two trees, and stretch out a walking-stick to the full
length of your arm, and the place where the end of your wand touches
is that in which my treasures are hidden." the wretched man then gave
up the ghost, and his family commenced the search; but though they
toiled hard for many days and weeks, turning up the stones in every
direction, they never succeeded in finding the treasure, and had now
given up the search in despair. the fact was, they omitted to ask
their parent on which side of the path it was concealed, and hence
their discomfiture. at my request the said family came to me,
corroborated the statements of the interpreter, and begged imploringly
i would direct them how to search for the money; saying at the same
time they would work again, if i thought it of any use; and, moreover,
they would give me half if the search proved successful. i lent them
some english pick-axes, and went to see the place, which certainly
showed traces of very severe exertions; but the strong nature of the
soil was too much for them, even when armed with tools, unless they
were fortunate enough to hit upon the exact spot, which they did not,
and therefore toiled in vain again.

the warsingali complained to me sadly of their decline in power since
the english had interfered in their fights with the habr teljala,
which took place near aden about seven years ago, and had deprived
them of their vessels for creating a disturbance, which interfered
with the ordinary routine of traffic. they said that on that occasion
they had not only beaten the habr teljala, but had seized one of their
vessels; and that prior to this rupture they had enjoyed paramount
superiority over all the tribes of the somali; but now that they were
forbidden to transport soldiers or make reprisals on the sea, every
tribe was on an equality with them.

they further spoke of the decline of their tribe's morals since the
time when the english took possession of aden and brought in
civilisation with them. this they in most part attributed to our weak
manner in prosecuting crime, by requiring too accurate evidence before
inflicting punishment; saying that many a dishonest person escaped the
vengeance of law from the simple fact of there being no eyewitnesses
to his crime, although there existed such strong presumptive evidence
as to render the accusation proved. when speaking against our laws,
and about their insufficiency to carry out all governmental points
with a strong and spirited hand, they never forget to laud their own
sultan's despotic powers and equity in justice.

of course no mortal man was like their gerad mahamed ali. in leading
them to war he was like the english french,[12] and in settling
disputes he required no writing office, but, sitting on the woolsack,
he listened to the narration of prosecution and defence with his head
buried in his hands, and never uttering a word until the trial was
over, when he gave his final decision in one word only, ay or nay,
without comment of any sort. in confirmation of their statements, they
gave the description of a recent trial, when a boy was accused of
having attempted to steal some rice from a granary; the lad had put
his hand through a chink in the door of it, and had succeeded in
getting one finger, up to the second joint, in the grain; this, during
the trial, he frankly acknowledged having done, and the sultan
appointed that much of his finger exactly to be cut off, and no
more--punishing the deed exactly according to its deserts. this, to
somali notions, seemed a punctiliousness in strict equity of judicial
administration which nothing could excel, and they bragged of it
accordingly.

becoming dreadfully impatient at so much loss of precious time whilst
waiting here, unable to prepare in any way for the journey, i sent
repeated messages to the sultan, demanding his immediate attendance;
but it was not until the 6th of november that i heard definitely of
his approach, and then it was that he was coming down the hill.

on the 7th he came with a host of akils to bunder gori, and put up in
a nahkoda's hut. this indignity he was obliged to submit to, as he had
not cautioned the merchants who occupied his forts of his intended
approach, and now no one would turn out for him. finding him so near
me, i longed to walk over to him and settle matters personally at
once; but dignity forbade it; and as he had come with such cautious
trepidation, i feared any over-hastiness might frighten him away
again. he seemed to observe the same punctiliousness towards me, so i
split the difference by sending an embassy by my abban, assisted by
other powerful akils, early the following morning, when they held
durbar, and my intentions of travelling were fully discussed in open
court. for a long time the elders on the sultan's side were highly
adverse to my seeing their country, considering no good could possibly
arise from it, and much harm might follow; i might covet their
country, and eventually take it from them, whereas they could gain
nothing. hearing this, the abban waxed very wroth, and indignantly
retorted he would never allow such a slur to be cast upon _his
honour_, or the office which he held. he argued he had come there as
my adviser and abban; his parentage was of such high order, his
patriotism could not be doubted. had he not fought battles by their
side, of which his scars bore living testimony? and now they wished to
stigmatise him as a traitor to his country! the sultan must decide it.
how could jungle-folk like them know anything of the english and their
intentions?

the sultan listened silently during this discourse, which, though
written in a few lines, took many hours of hot debating, by their
turning and turning every little particular over and over again; and
finally decided it in his usual curt and conclusive manner, by saying,
"the warsingali were on the most friendly and amicable relations with
the english; and as he was desirous of maintaining it, he would give
me leave to travel anywhere i liked within his dominions, and to see
and examine anything i chose. but out of fear for the consequences, as
the english would hold him answerable should any disasters befall me,
he could not sanction my crossing over his frontier in any direction,
and more especially into the dulbahanta country, where wars were
raging, and the country so unsafe that even warsingali dare not
venture there." this announcement was brought back in high exultation
by sumunter, who thought his success complete, and at the same time
announced to me the sultan's intention of honouring me with a visit in
the evening, which was duly done.

he came a little before sunset, with his bare head shaven, a dirty
coloured tobe thrown over his shoulders, and hanging loosely down to
his sandaled feet.[13] he looked for all the world like a patriarch of
the olden times, and passed me, marching in martial order in the
centre of a double line of men sloping their spears in bristling array
over their shoulders, all keeping step in slow marching order, a scene
evidently got up in imitation of our soldiers. not a word was spoken,
and the deepest solemnity prevailed. on his arrival in front of the
fort, i drew up my men, and fired a salute to give him welcome. this
was done in right good earnest, by every man cramming his gun with
powder, to excel his neighbour in a loud report, to show the
superiority of his weapon; for such is the black man's notions of
excellence in a fowling-piece. the march concluded, the sultan with
his followers all huddled together and squatted on the ground outside
the second fort, deeply agitated, and not knowing what to do, as they
evidently dreaded what might follow. to dissipate their fears, i
approached his royalty, salaamed, and tried to beguile the time by
engaging them in conversation.

finding that this had rather the opposite effect, i then retired, and
soon found them all intently wrapped up in prayer, prostrating and
rising by turns, with uplifted hands, and muttering for hours together
without cessation. i then ordered a regal repast to be served them of
rice swimming in ghee, and dates _ad libitum_. this, notwithstanding
their alarm, was despatched with the most marvellous rapacity, to such
an alarming extent, that i required to know how many men were engaged
in eating it. the abban replied that there were only a few: he would
not allow many to come over here out of a spirit of economy, knowing i
had not much property to spare, though all the rest had wished to
come, and were greatly disappointed. but these men, as is usual
amongst somali, had prepared themselves for a feast by several days'
previous fasting, and each man would, if i allowed it, swallow at one
meal as much as a sheep's skin could contain. as a gun is known by the
loudness of its report, and ability to stand a large discharge of
powder, to be of good quality, so is a man's power gauged by his
capacity of devouring food; it is considered a feat of superiority to
surpass another in eating.

i have seen a somali myself, when half-starved by long fasting, and
his stomach drawn in, sit down to a large skinful of milk, and drink
away without drawing breath until it was quite empty, and it was easy
to observe his stomach swelling out in exact proportion as the skin of
liquor decreased. they are perfect dogs in this fashion. i may here
add, that although the abban in this speech seemed to show so much
consideration for my property, by several recent tricks of his i
entertained much suspicion of his honesty; and this little address,
though uttered plausibly, was too common and transparent a trick in
the east to beguile me. all orientals have a proverbial habit of
saving their master's property to leave greater pickings for
themselves, and such i considered was sumunter's dodge now.

8th november.--this morning the sultan, having now recovered, came to
return my salaam of the previous evening, when i opened to him the
purport of my expedition in minute detail: how i wished to visit the
southern dulbahantas, cross and inspect the wadi nogal, and thence
proceed west to meet my friends, stroyan and herne, at berbera. he
listened very attentively and politely, but at the conclusion repeated
the words i had already heard; adding that the dulbahantas had
intestine wars; they had been fighting many years, and were now in hot
strife, dividing the government of their country. not many days since
a report had arrived that the southern portion of them, who occupied
the countries about one hundred miles due south of bunder heis, had
had a fight with the northern ones, who were living on the same
meridian, immediately to their northward, and had succeeded in
capturing 2000 horses, 400 camels, a great number of sheep and goats,
and had wounded one man severely: it was therefore impossible i could
go from the northern division to the southern, for i should be treated
as an enemy; and that was the only line on which water could be found
during this, the dry season. had i come here during the monsoon, i
might have travelled directly in a diagonal line, from the south of
the mountain-range to the rear of this place, into their, the
southerners', country, who were the older branch, and were now
governed by the hereditary and rightful chief, gerad mahamed ali, who
was on the most friendly terms with the warsingali, and who, being an
old chief, and well respected by his adherent subjects, might have
granted me a hospitable reception.

on the other hand, the northern dulbahantas, who were also friendly
with the warsingali, were under no control: the gerad, by name mahamed
ali also, was recently installed in government, and was consequently
very little respected. he (the warsingali chief) could not, therefore,
give his sanction to my going amongst them, by which my life would be
endangered, and he, for permitting it, would be held responsible by
the english. no arguments of mine would alter the decision of the
inflexible chief; i therefore changed the subject by asking him to
assist me in procuring camels, by which i might go into the interior,
and feel my way thereafter. this he readily agreed to, and begged
permission to return to bunder gori to give the necessary orders to
his subjects. his escort then demanded a cloth apiece from me, to be
given them for their trouble in coming over here; arguing that, had i
not required the sultan's attendance, they would not have had to
come;--a plausible, but truly somali notion of justice; they knew
their proper master would give them nothing for coming to support his
dignity, but thought i might be softer.

10th.--the sultan, not able to do business hurriedly with his rabble
subjects, did not appear again until this morning, and then, instead
of proceeding at once to work, hinted he should like to have the
presents i had brought from aden for him, as the best method of
showing our feelings to one another. this was not so easily concluded.
i portioned out the things that were intended for him, and wished he
would take them at once away and clear the room, thinking, in my
inexperience of savages, i had only to give, and it would be received
with a hearty bism-illah; but i was soon undeceived: the things were
taken with a grunt of discontentment; all looked over one by one. if a
cloth was soiled, it must be changed; and then the measurements began
by cubits = 18 inches, or from the point of the elbow to the tip of
the middle finger, just as noah must have done when he built the ark.
but as all forearms are not of equal length, much delay was occasioned
by the sultan trying the length of his forearm against everybody's in
the room, and then by measuring every cloth by turn, and remeasuring
them again for fear of mistake; then they were divided into lots, to
be disposed of to his wives, and children and akils and servants, and,
of course, found insufficient to meet everybody's expectations, and i
must give more.

tedious hours passed in this way; as a final petition, the sultan said
i must give him for himself a gun and my silk turban, as i had given
up wearing anything on my head, and did not require it: these were,
after a certain amount of haggling, surrendered, on condition that the
sultan would exert himself a little more energetically on my account.
the way he handled the musket was very amusing: he had never had one
in his hands before, and could not get it to sit against his shoulder;
and when his people placed it for him, he persisted in always cocking
the wrong eye, which tickled farhan's fancy so much, that he burst
into loud roars of laughter. nevertheless, the sultan took things
quietly, and would not allow himself to be discomposed, but coolly
said the gun would be of no use unless i gave him some powder to feed
it with. this last straw broke the camel's back; all things must have
an end, and i promised i would give him some after he procured enough
camels for my wants, but not before. this settled the matter, and he
walked off, with all the things i had given him, as sulkily as if he
had been injured.

camels were then brought for sale, and purchasing commenced. when the
sultan was present, he had to determine if the prices asked by the
sellers were reasonable or not, and took for his office as mediator a
tithe on all purchases; but in his absence, akils were appointed to
officiate on the same conditions. this system of robbing, i was
assured, was the custom of the country, and if i wanted to buy at all
i must abide by it. cloth was at a great discount on the coast, for
the men there had, by their dealings with aden, become accustomed to
handle dollars, and were in consequence inspired with that superior
innate love for the precious metal over all other materials, with
which all men, and especially those newly acquainted with it, become
unaccountably possessed. no one would believe that my boxes could be
made for any other purpose than for locking up money; and i was
obliged to leave them open to inspection before they would sell
anything for cloth.[14]

the sultan now lived at bunder gori, and seldom showed himself,
promising to come to me every day, without the least intention of
doing so; and only at last, after three days' absence, when i
threatened to invade his dwelling, did he appear, bringing several
camels with him: of these i purchased some good ones, and sent the
rest away: this was the 15th november. he then returned home again,
and promised faithfully he would bring on the morrow a sufficient
number of camels to carry all my kit.

16th.--for the first time the sultan kept his promise by returning,
but the animals he brought were weak and useless, and i could plainly
see i was being trifled with, and detained here for the mere purpose
of being robbed in an indirect manner, so that no accusation could be
laid against any one. nothing, i may say, in all my experiences, vexes
the mind so much as feeling one's self injured in a way that cannot be
prevented or avenged. some might take such matters quietly, but i
confess i could not. indeed, i stormed and expostulated with the
sultan until he agreed to assist me in a move. i had now eleven
camels, and wanted some five more, but thought it better not to wait;
for as long as i remained in a comfortable dwelling, i knew my men
would not exert themselves. that day, then, packing up what i most
required, i started for bunder gori, and unloaded, after a three
miles' march, at an old well in rear of the village, selecting as a
camping-ground the least comfortable place i could find, and not
allowing the tent to be pitched, though the sun-heat was 112 degrees,
and the sand was blowing in perfect clouds. some days previous to my
leaving goriat, sumunter induced me to give him twenty rupees to hire
donkeys for conveying the heavier things over the hills, and
repeatedly assured me he had got them, but they never came; and now i
asked him to return the money, as i had brought it with me as a
reserve fund, to provide against any possible difficulty, and not to
be parted with for any ordinary purpose. this commenced a series of
rows between sumunter and myself: he had made away with the money, and
could not produce it. the salt also was never forthcoming.

17th.--i could not succeed in making up my complement of camels. the
sultan said he and his men must be fed before they could do work, and
sat upon the date-bags so resolutely i was fain to open them that some
business might be done. after feasting they all dispersed, under
pretence of bringing other camels, and i went into the town to inspect
the place. there were five small forts, occupied by merchants, of whom
one was a hindi from cutch, and a large collection of mat huts, mostly
occupied by women. instead of finding a harbour (bunder), as the name
of the village implied, the shore was a gradual shelving open
roadstead, in which two buggaloes were lying at anchor, waiting for
cargoes, and four small sailing-boats were preparing, with harpoon and
tackle, to go porpoise-hunting for oil.

18th.--having made everybody as uncomfortable as i could wish, sitting
in the sandy open plain, all the men were equally desirous with myself
for a move on the journey; but still i was five camels short, and saw
no hopes of getting them. the plan then settled was to move southwards
half-way up the hill, leaving the few things still in the fort as they
were, until i arrived at the camping-place, and could send the animals
i was taking with me back to fetch them. having now desired the
sultan, sumunter, and farhan to return to goriat, and leave the rear
property in safe custody with the fort-keeper, i commenced the march
across the maritime plain with ahmed, imam, a number of somali
camel-tenders armed with spear and bow, and the sultan's youngest son,
abdullah, to direct the way until his father and the other two should
arrive, which they promised they would do by the evening. the track
first led us across the maritime plain, here about two miles broad,
and composed of sand overlying limestone, with boulders in the dry
shallow watercourses, and with no vegetable life save a few scrub
acacias and certain salsola. this traversed, we next wound along a
deep ravine called tug (river) tura,[15] lying between the lower spurs
of the mountain-range, and commenced a slight ascent up its cracked,
uneven passage, until we reached a halting-place called iskodubuk. the
distance we had made was only about five miles from bunder gori, but
the camels were so fatigued by travelling over boulders, that we were
obliged to unload and stop there for the day. the sultan and abban now
overtook us to say that the rear things were in safe custody in the
fort; and, leaving instructions with the young prince abdullah about
the road we should follow on the morrow, returned _nolens volens_ back
to bunder gori, saying, as they went away, we might expect them at the
next camping-ground as soon even as we could get there with the
camels. a little after sunset, some interesting rock-pigeons--very
similar to the indian painted bird, which i found there frequenting
ground much of the same nature--lit at some pools in the bed of the
ravine, and enabled me to shoot and stuff several of them.

19th.--we got under way in the early morning, and commenced ascending
the same ravine, when a messenger from the sultan arrived, and desired
we would stop until he came. we had scarcely accomplished two miles,
and the morning was yet young and cool, and i strove with every effort
in my power to induce the men to go a little further forward, but
without the slightest effect; they were as obstinate as mules, and
just as unruly. this was a fair specimen of somali travelling; any
pretext to save the trouble of moving is accounted too precious to be
lost. the ground here was a little more wooded; tall slender trees,
with thick green foliage, grew in the bed of the ravine, in which
there were some occasional pools of stagnant rain-water, and the brown
rocky hill-sides were decorated with budding bush acacias, which
afforded a good repast for the weary camels, whose journey over the
boulders must have been very fatiguing to them.

20th.--as the sultan did not arrive, and the young prince would not
allow my men to load, i ordered the interpreter and imam to remain
where they were, whilst i returned to bunder gori to see what was the
matter, and on no account were they to issue any food until i came
back again. as soon as i had gone two or three miles, i found the
young prince and all the camel-men hastening after me, and entreating
me to return; they said the sultan was on his way, and would arrive in
camp in the evening. i complied, conditionally that they bound
themselves to march in the morning whether he came or not. once again
in camp, i had my food prepared, and sat savagely watching the effect
its odour had upon my starving men, who, fearing they would get none,
formed in a body, and came petitioning me to forgive them, as they
consented to do my bidding for ever after. they were then fed.

21st.--after loading in the morning, with a great deal of beating and
thumping, all the camels, save two or three weakly ones, were whipped
up a winding steep ridge, one of the buttresses of the mountain, to a
camping-ground, six miles farther on, called adhai. here we were at
the station originally assigned for the first day's march, and, for
the first and last time during the whole journey, i pitched the tent.
the higher we ascended the hill the more abundant became the wooding,
and green grass for the first time was visible amongst the stones.
this freshness was attributed to a recent fall of rain. altitude, by
boiling thermometer, 4577 feet.

22d.--i sent all the freshest camels off to goriat for the remaining
property, with orders that everybody should return on the following
day. at this height the temperature of the air was very delightful,
the range at noon being only 79o. i spent the whole day
specimen-hunting, and found the rocks were full of fossil shells. i
killed a new snake or variety of _psammophis sibilans_, and shot an
interesting little antelope, _oreotragus saltatrix_, the
"klip-springer" of the cape colonist, as well as hyraxes and various
small birds, which we duly preserved. my collections in this country
were sent by lieutenant burton to the asiatic society's museum,
calcutta, and have been described in their journals by mr e. blyth,
the curator.

23d and 24th.--passed without anybody appearing, and i was becoming
much alarmed at repeated stories i heard of the abban's dishonesty. it
then transpired that sumunter was heavily in debt, and one of his
principal creditors was at bunder gori detaining him there. a pony had
been hired for my riding, and on this animal i wished to send imam
back, to find out the truth of everything, and to return to me the
following day; but the wicked young prince, abdullah, got wind of my
intention, and had the pony driven away, so that the unfortunate imam
had to walk.

25th.--still nobody came. i now despatched the interpreter on the same
mission, and was left alone with the young prince and two or three
camel-drivers. after a little while had elapsed, a number of savage
hungry-looking men came up the hill and settled themselves in my
encampment, squatting on the date-bags and clamouring for food. the
prince and camel-drivers joined them, and became so importunate, i was
obliged to rebuke them with angry demonstration. no sooner did they
see me vexed than they began hovering tauntingly around me, jeering
and vociferating in savage delight at the impunity they enjoyed in
irritating me when all alone and helpless. however, i stood by the
date and rice bags with my gun, and prevented anybody coming near me.
the prince and camel-men now seeing me determined, and no farther
discomposed by their manoeuvres, came supplicating for their daily
rations. i gave it them at once, but could not satisfy them; they must
have some more for all their brothers (meaning the _blackguards_ who
had just arrived), or they would strike work. this stirred my blood; i
took back what i had given, and resolutely declined to be passively
cajoled out of anything, let happen what may. they saw i was
determined not to submit to them; and suddenly, as if the same thought
struck every one of them at the same instant, they dashed down the
hill, flying over the bushes and stones in their way, with yells and
shouts, and, seizing a goat from a neighbouring flock, killed and
quartered it without a moment's hesitation. at this juncture, just as
the robbed shepherd came crying to me for the price of his goat, imam
arrived from goriat, and tried to reason with him that it was no
business of mine, and i could not be expected to pay it. the injured
man then swore he would have justice done him at the sultan's hands,
and all yelled again for dates and rice. as they could not get it, the
young prince, ever full of boyish tricks, now seized up a mussack
(water-skin), and said i should have no more water until i complied
with their demands. the others, following his example, picked up as
many more as they could find, and left but one mussack remaining. this
one i immediately captured, and requested imam to fill from a spring
farther down the hill; but the men, thus far outdone, rather than
allow it, said they would kill him if he dared attempt to go now. as
imam showed alarm at their wild threats, i took the water-skin myself
and walked off to fill it, upon which the savages threw themselves out
in line, flourishing their spears and bows, and declared they would
kill me if i persisted in going. on i went, however, and had just
passed through their line, when the sultan's eldest son, mohamed aul,
fortunately arrived, and rebuked them, together with his brother, for
allowing me to be ill-treated. finding mohamed aul very reasonable and
obliging, i begged him to send abdullah away as a nuisance, for i
could never permit him to eat any more salt of mine.

imam now disclosed to me the results of his investigations at goriat
and bunder gori. the abban, as i had heard before, was detained there
by a creditor to whom he had contracted debts in aden, and now, in
part liquidation of them, he had given away all my salt, the twenty
rupees he took for hiring donkeys, several pieces of cloth, and he had
changed my good rice for bad; and, knowing farhan to be cognisant of
all his villanies, had tried by bribes to induce him to desert. the
sultan now arrived, and excused his long absence, saying that he had
lost the time in fruitless endeavours to induce sumunter to come with
him. he said he had been remonstrating with sumunter, and thought him
very culpable in not obeying me. hoping the sultan was in earnest in
what he said, i now told him of all i had seen and heard about
sumunter, and begged he would assist me in sending him back to aden,
for no reliance could possibly be placed on a man who had proved
himself so dishonest and unprincipled as he was. the interpreter also
thought this would be a good plan, and advised my employing the
sultan's brother hasan as abban or protector in his stead. however,
the sultan said he could not undo what the english had done in aden,
but said if i wished he would send for sumunter and rebuke him in my
presence. i replied that i thought he could not get sumunter to leave
bunder gori, or he should have done so ere this. this touched his
pride, and he raised his body indignantly, and said, "if i command, he
must obey." "then, for goodness' sake," said i, "order him with
all--all my things at once, and lose no more time."

the following day they all arrived, and sumunter with them, riding on
a pony. i felt much incensed as the abban came cringing up to me, and
proclaimed him in presence of the sultan and all my men a traitor and
robber, mentioning all his villanies in detail, and begging he would
leave my camp at once, for i could not travel with him. he appeared
very humble, and denied flatly all the accusations i brought against
him. upon this i begged the sultan, flattering him with his great
renown for administering justice, that he would do me justice as his
guest. he said he was willing to do anything for me if i would direct
the way in which i wished him to proceed; he did not understand the
english law, and i must submit to somali methods. this was agreed to,
and we all assembled in my tent, and arranged the court as follows:--i
sat at the gable end of the tent with imam, ahmed, and farhan, with
sumunter facing us. the sultan mounted on the bales of cloth, and all
his retainers and princes, and my camel-drivers, sat in a group on the
ground at his feet.

in opening the proceedings of the prosecution, i first said to
sumunter--

_p. speke_.--"where is the salt which you confess came with us to
goriat, and which you have told me daily you would give; but as yet,
though everything, you say, is in the camp, it has not arrived?"

_d. sumunter_.--"i did not bring it because it was so heavy, and
thought you would not want it."

_p._--"then why did you not land it at goriat, and give it me there,
or why did you even buy it at all at aden if it was of no use?"

_d._--"because the nahkoda took it to bunder gori."

after a few more questions and answers, and the subject was exhausted,
the sultan (judge), who had been sitting in silence with his head
buried in his hands, now gave a grunt and motioned us to continue.

_p._--"where are the bales of cloth which by my account and imam's are
missing?"

_d._--"i did not take them; somebody else must have."

_p._--" they were in your charge, and you are answerable for them;
besides which, farhan here knows you gave them away."

_judge_.--"ahem!" and the prosecution continued.

_p._--"where are the twenty rupees i gave you for hiring donkeys, and
which i particularly ordered should not be expended for any other
purpose?"

sumunter, putting his hand fixedly in his breast, said, "i've got
them; they are all right. i will give them to you presently."

_speke_.--"no! give them to me now; i want them this instant."

sumunter, confused, and fumbling at his pocket, much to the delight of
all the court, who burst with laughter, said, "no! i've left them at
home in bunder gori, and will give them by-and-by."

_judge_.--"ahem!" and the prosecution continued.

_p._--"why did you change my good rice for bad?" (opening and showing
the contents of the nearest sack).

_d._--"i thought it would not signify: bad rice is good enough for the
camel-drivers, and i have left enough good for your consumption. an
old friend asked me for it, and i did it to oblige him."

_judge_.--"ahem!" and the prosecution continued.

_p._--"why did you attempt to bribe farhan to leave my service, and
say nothing to me about it?"

_d._--"farhan is a bad man; and i was afraid he would steal your
things."

_judge_.--"ahem!"

thus ended the prosecution and defence. the sultan raised his head,
and in answer to my appeal as to what judgment he would give, calmly
said, he could see no harm in what had been done--sumunter was my
abban, and, in virtue of the ship he commanded, was at liberty to do
whatever he pleased either with or to my property. words, in fact,
equivalent to saying i had come into a land of robbers, and therefore
must submit to being robbed; and this i plainly told him. further, i
even threatened the sultan with a pretended determination to return to
aden, where i said the matter would be settled at our police court
without bias or favour. i then desired the interpreter to look out for
any vessel that would give me a passage to aden, as it was obvious to
me sumunter had more power in the land than the sultan. this took them
all by surprise, abashed the old sultan and his family--for they were
proud of their strength--and induced them to say i need not fear
anything on that score;--was the sultan of the warsingali, indeed, not
the greatest chief in the land, and, moreover, a great ally of the
english? this, of course, was only a feint on my part to bring them to
a proper sense of their duty towards me; for i had brought letters of
recommendation from the government at aden to their chief, and knew
they would rather do anything than let me go back in a huff.

29th.--i had been now nine days waiting here, and had taken many walks
about the hill-sides, investigating the place, and making sundry
collections. the most interesting amongst these was a small lizard, a
new species, afterwards named by mr e. blyth, the curator of the
asiatic society, _tiloqua burtoni_, after my commandant. the somali
brought a leopard into camp, which they said they had destroyed in a
cave by beating it to death with sticks and stones. they have a mortal
antipathy to these animals, as they sometimes kill defenceless men,
and are very destructive to their flocks. besides the little antelope
described, i only saw the saltiana antelope, and the tracks of two
other species which were said to be very scarce. rhinoceroses were
formerly very abundant here, but have been nearly all killed down with
spear and bow (they do not use firearms) by the somali hunters, in
consequence of the great demand for their skins for making shields.
amongst the bush and trees there were several gum-producing ones, of
which the frankincense, i think, ranked first. these gums are usually
plucked by the women and transported to aden. the barks of various
other trees are also very useful; for instance, they strip down the
bark of the acacia in long slips, and chew it until only fibres
remain, which, when twisted in the hand, make strong cordage. the
acacia bark also makes a good tan for preserving leather; but of far
greater account than this is the bark of a squat stunted tree, like
the "elephant's foot," called by the somali mohur, which has a smooth
skin, with knotty-looking warts upon it like a huge turnip, reddish
inside, with a yellowish-green exterior. it has a highly aromatic
flavour, and is a powerful astringent. when making mussacks, the
somali pull a sheep or goat out of his skin; tie its legs and tail,
where incisions had been made, to make it a waterproof bag, and then
fill it with bits of this bark, chopped up and mixed with water. they
then suspend it in a tree to dry, and afterwards render it soft and
pliable by a severe course of manipulation. the taste of the bark is
considered very wholesome, and a corrective to bad and fetid water.
besides possessing this quality, the mohur is useful as a
poultice-when mashed and mixed with water; and the somali always have
recourse to it when badly wounded.

during my peregrinations at this place, i often dropped bits of paper
about the jungle, little suspecting what would become of them; and, to
my surprise, one day the interpreter came to me in some alarm, to say
that several dulbahantas had arrived at bunder gori, and were sharply
canvassing amongst themselves the probable objects of my visit. i
could not be travelling without a purpose, at so much expense; and
they thought these bits of paper, which they had carefully picked up,
conclusive evidence i was marking out some spots for future purposes.
they abused the warsingali for being such fools as to let me travel in
their country, and said i should never cross over to them. this little
incident of dropping paper, though fully explained to them, was ever
afterwards brought up in accusation against me, and proved very
perplexing.

30th.--camp habal ishawale. altitude 5052 feet.--we were now all
together, and i thought ready to march; but the men had first to be
paid their hire in advance--a monthly stipend of five tobes each. when
that was settled, many other men, and amongst them the sultan's second
brother hassan, coveting my clothes, wished to be engaged. some
tedious hours were wasted on this subject. the sultan, at the
instigation of these advocates for service, would have it, if i wished
to travel according to the custom of the country, i must take more men
with me as a guard. i, on the other hand, neither wanted them nor
could afford to pay them, as i had been so extensively plundered--but
wished to exchange sumunter for his brother, and promised high rewards
if he would take me through the journey. to put an end to the
discussion, i struck my tent, never to be pitched again, and waited
patiently until the camels came. it was not until near sundown that
the camels were ready and the march commenced. the sultan then ordered
hassan and the naughty boy abdullah, against my wish, to accompany me
on the journey; and we set off, leaving two or three loads behind to
be brought up on the morrow. the march was a short one, made to
relieve the one beyond; for the spring of water we were now drinking
from was the last on this side the range. it led us up a gradual but
tortuous ascent, very thickly clad with strong bushes, to a kraal or
ring-fence of prickly acacias, which was evidently made to protect the
somali's sheep from lions, leopards, hyenas, and freebooters suddenly
pouncing on them.

we remained here three days, sending the things i had brought in
relays across the mountain, and fetching up the rear ones. the sultan
could not lose the opportunity afforded by my detention to come again
and beg for presents, and i gave him a razor to shave his head with
and make a clean mussulman of him. on finding he could get nothing
further from me gratis, he demanded that a cloth should be paid to the
man whom my camel-drivers had robbed of the goat at adhai, and, before
retiring, wished me urgently to take a letter for him to aden,
petitioning the english to allow him to form an expedition by sea, and
take retribution on the musa abokr at heis, who had recently killed
one of his subjects.





                          chapter iii.

yafir pass--rhut tug--the ruins at kin's city--abban apprehends future
consequences--hyenas--the dulbahantas--camel drivers' tricks--briny
water--antelope-shooting--elephant-hunting--ostrich-hunting
--gazelles--jealousy and suspicions of the people--troubles from forty
thieves--rapid decline of property.



4th december 1854.--at dawn of day the last of the camels was loaded,
and we set out to clamber up to the top of the mountain-range and
descend on the other side to the first watering-place in the interior
of the country. it was a double march, and a very stiff one for the
camels. directly in our front lay an easy, flattish ground, with
moderate undulations, densely wooded with such trees as i had already
seen; but beyond it, about three miles from camp, the face of the
mountain-top, towering to a great height, stood frowning over us like
a huge bluff wall, which at first sight it appeared quite impossible
any camel could surmount. at 9 a.m. we reached this steep, and
commenced the stiffest and last ascent up a winding, narrow goat-path,
having sharp turns at the extremity of every zigzag, and with huge
projecting stones, which seemed to bid defiance to the passage of the
camels' bodies. indeed, it was very marvellous, with their long
spindle-shanks and great splay feet, and the awkward boxes on their
backs striking constantly against every little projection in the hill,
that they did not tumble headlong over the pathway; for many times, at
the corners, they fell upon their chests, with their hind-legs
dangling over the side, and were only pulled into the path again by
the combined exertions of all the men. like tibet ponies, when they
felt their bodies slipping helplessly over the precipices--down which,
had they fallen, they would have met instantaneous and certain
death--they invariably seized hold of anything and everything with
their teeth to save their equilibrium. the ascent was at length
completed after an infinity of trouble, and our view from the top of
the mountain repaid me fully for everything of the past. it was a
glorious place! in one glance round i had a complete survey of all the
country i was now destined to travel over, and what i had already gone
over.

the pass was called yafir, and, by the boiling thermometer, showed an
altitude of 6704 feet. it was almost the highest point on this range.
from a cedar tree i cooked my breakfast under, on facing to the north
i saw at once the vast waters of the gulf, all smooth and glassy as a
mill-pond, the village of bunder gori, and the two buggaloes lying in
its anchorage-ground, like little dots of nut-shells, immediately
below the steep face of the mountain. so deep and perpendicular was
it, that it had almost the effect of looking down a vast precipice.
but how different was the view on turning to the south! instead of
this enormous grandeur--a deep rugged hill, green and fresh in
verdure, with the sea like a large lake below--it was tame in the
extreme; the land dropped gently to scarcely more than half its depth,
with barely a tree visible on its surface; and at the foot of the
hill, stretched out as far as the eye could reach, was a howling,
blank-looking desert, all hot and arid, and very wretched to look
upon. it was the more disappointing, as the somali had pictured this
to me as a land of promise, literally flowing with milk and honey,
where, they said, i should see boundless prairies of grass, large
roomy trees, beautiful valleys with deep brooks running down them, and
cattle, wild animals, and bees in abundance. perhaps this was true to
them, who had seen nothing finer in creation; who thought ponies fine
horses, a few weeds grass, and a puny little brook a fine large
stream. at noon we reloaded, and proceeded to join the camels and men
sent forward on the previous day. the track first led us a mile or two
across the hill-top, where i remarked several heaps of stones piled
up, much after the fashion of those monuments the tibet tartars erect
in commemoration of their lahma saints. these, the somali said, were
left here by their predecessors, and, they thought, were christian
tombs. once over the brow of the hill, we descended the slopes on the
south, which fell gently in terraces, and travelled until dark, when
we reached a deep nullah, here called mukur, in which we found our
vanguard safely encamped in a strong ring-fence of thorn bushes.

the distance accomplished was seventeen miles; the altitude 3660 feet.
the two following days (5th and 6th) we halted to rest the cattle,
whilst i went shooting and collecting. there were a great number of
gazelles and antelopes, some bustard, many florikan and partridges, as
well as other very interesting birds and reptiles. these were mostly
found in ravines at the foot of the hills, or amongst acacia and
jujube trees, with patches of heather in places. we now held
_durbar_,[16] to consult on the plan of proceeding. it was obviously
impossible to march across the plateau directly upon the southern
dulbahantas, as there was not a blade of grass to be seen nor any
water on the way beyond the first ten miles from the foot of the
hills. to go to berbera, then, i must perforce pass through the
territories of the northern dulbahantas; and this was fixed upon. but
hearing of some "ancient christian ruins" (left by sultan kin) only a
day's march to the south-eastward, i resolved to see them first, and
on the 7th made a move five miles in that direction to a kraal, called
karrah, where we found a deep pool of stagnant water.

8th.--my kit was now so much diminished that we all marched together
down a broad shallow valley south-eastward, in which meandered a
nullah, called rhut tug, the first wadi i came upon in nogal. the
distance accomplished was eight miles when we put up in the kraal of
rhut; for, as i have said before, there were no villages or permanent
habitations in the interior of the nogal country. all the little
wooding there is, is found in depressions like this, near the base of
hill-ranges, where water is moderately near the surface, and the trees
are sheltered from the winds that blow over the higher grounds of the
general plateau. rhut is the most favoured spot in the warsingali
dominions, and had been loudly lauded by my followers; but all i could
find were a few trees larger than the ordinary acacias, a symptom of
grass having grown there in more favoured times when rain had fallen,
a few puddles of water in the bed of the nullah, and one flock of
sheep to keep the place alive. gazelles were numerous, and many small
birds in gaudy plumage flitted about the trees, amongst which the most
beautiful was the _lamprotornis superba_, a kind of maina, called by
the somali lhimber-load (the cowbird), because it follows after cows
to feed.

9th.--halt. kin's city, or rather the ruins of it, i was told, lay to
the northward of my camp, in the direction of the hills, at a distance
of about two miles; so i proceeded at once to see it, hoping by this
means i should be able to advance westward on the following day. after
an hour's walk i came upon those remains of which i had heard so much
at first on landing in the country, as indicative of the great
advancement in architectural art of kin's christian legion over the
present somali inhabitants; but i was as much disappointed in this
matter as in all others of somali fabrication. there were five objects
of attraction here:--1. the ruins of a (said to be) christian church;
2. the site and remains of a village; 3. a hole in the ground,
denoting a lime-kiln; 4. a cemetery; and, 5. the ground-lines of a
fort. this certainly showed a degree of advancement beyond what the
somali now enjoy, inasmuch as they have no buildings in the interior,
though that does not say much for the ancients. the plan of the church
is an oblong square, 48 by 27 feet, its length lying n.e. and s.w.,
whilst its breadth was directed n.w. and s.e., which latter may be
considered its front and rear. in the centre of the n.w. wall there
was a niche, which evidently, if built by christians, was intended to
point to jerusalem; and this might have been conclusive evidence of
its having been a christian house of worship, and consequently of
great antiquity, did it not unfortunately point likewise in the
direction of mecca, to which place all mohammedans turn when saying
their prayers. again, i entertained some suspicion that the walls,
which were in some parts ten feet high, had not sufficient decay to
warrant their being four and a half or more centuries old. but one
thing was remarkable at this present time--there were no springs or
any water nearer than my camping place, which could not have been the
case when this place was occupied; but it denoted a certain amount of
antiquity, without any doubt. the walls of the church were composed of
limestone rocks, cemented together with a very pure white lime.

the entrance fronted the niche, and was led up to by a street of round
pebbles, protected on each side by semicircular loosely-thrown-up
stone walls. there was nothing left of the village but its foundation
outlines, which at once showed simplicity of construction, as well as
economy of labour in building. it lay about 50 yards to the east of
the church. one straight wall ran down the centre, from which, as
supports, ran out a number of lateral chambers lying at right angles
to it.

to the northward of the church was the cemetery, in which, strange to
say, if the somali believe their own story, they even at the present
time bury their dead, and erect crosses at the head of the tombs, in
the same manner as we christians do. the kiln was an artless hole in
the ground, in which there was a large collection of cinders, and
other debris not worth mentioning. lastly, the fort, or rather remains
of what the somali said had been one, was situated on an eminence
overlooking the village, and about 70 yards to the s.w. of the church.
now, having completed my investigations of the ruins, i returned to
camp, where i was met by the abban, looking as sulky as a bear with a
sore head, and frowning diabolically. he had been brooding over my
late censures, and reflecting on the consequences his bad conduct
would finally have upon him, if he could not obtain a pardon from me.
and should he not be able to elicit it by fair means, he thought at
any rate he would extract it by foul, then and there, without
condition or any clause whatever. this was preposterous. i frankly
told him exactly what i thought of him, saying i could not forget what
had happened; that he had abused the trust reposed in him by the
english, and i was bound in duty to report the whole matter in every
detail to the government; but should he discontinue his evil ways, and
take me safely to my journey's end, i would promise him a full pardon
as soon as i arrived at berbera. this would not answer his
purpose--bygones must be bygones without any condition whatever, and
he went to his bed as wrathful as he rose.

10th.--i rose early and ordered the men to load, but not a soul would
stir. the abban had ordered otherwise, and they all preferred to
stick, like brother villains, to him. and then began a battle-royal;
as obstinately as i insisted, so obstinately did he persist; then, to
show his superior authority, and thinking to touch me on a tender
point, forbade my shooting any more. this was too much for my now
heated blood to stand, so i immediately killed a partridge running on
the ground before his face. seeing this, he wheeled about, prepared
his pony, and, mounting it, with his arms agitated and ready for
action, said to the people standing by that he would kill me if i
dared shoot again. i was all this while standing prepared to shoot,
without understanding a word of what was said, when the interpreter
rushed towards me pale and trembling, and implored me not to shoot,
but to arrange matters quietly. he would not tell me, however, what
had occasioned the great anxiety his excited manner showed. i of
course was ready at any time to do anything i could to help me on the
journey, and again stated the terms on which i would grant the man a
pardon. at this juncture, hassan, the sultan's brother, who had been
absent a few days, came and interceded between us. i told him
everything that had happened, how the abban had even superseded the
sultan's order, by forbidding me to do what i wished in his country,
and again begged him to be my abban in sumunter's stead. this he said
he could not do, but gave sumunter a wigging, and desired me to go and
shoot anywhere i liked. thus ended this valuable day.

11th.--last night i shot a female spotted crocuta hyena (here called
durwa) in the act of robbing. these tiresome brutes prowl about at
night, and pick up anything they can find. their approach is always
indicated by a whining sound, which had prepared me on this occasion.
she was caught in the act of stealing away some leather thongs. the
specimen was a fine one, but until dissected i could not, from the
hermaphrodital form of these animals, determine which sex it was that
i had killed. we now prepared for the march westward, when hassan said
he would go back to near the mijjertaine frontier, where rain had
lately fallen, and all the warsingalis had migrated with their cattle,
to fetch some ponies, which he would bring to me in a few days, even
before i could arrive at the dulbahanta frontier, and begged a gun at
parting as judge's fee for his settlement of the abban question, and
as an earnest that he would bring the five ponies which i wanted. we
then got under way, and travelled westward, bidding rhut tug adieu,
but every one was stiff and formal. sumunter had not confessed
contrition, and i had not committed myself to saying that i would hush
the matter up, assuring him that in duty as a public officer i could
not, that i was bound to report every circumstance, though privately i
promised a pardon as before. after travelling a little way, we emerged
from the low land of the valley, and ascended a higher track to the
normal level of the plateau, which, as i have said before, was all
bleak and barren, with scarcely a tree growing on it, and very stony.
here i saw a large troop of ostriches and numberless gazelles stalking
away out of the line of the caravan's march. my men were all highly
anxious i should shoot them, but i would not, to try what effect it
would have on the abban, saying, sport was of secondary importance to
me, and i now only wished to finish the journey quickly.

by his detentions i had lost so much time, i despaired of reaching
berbera agreeably with my instructions, and, moreover, he had not
begged my pardon, from which i doubted his intention to serve me
faithfully. this caused a halt. sumunter and all the men alike said,
"of what good is your coming here, if you do not enjoy yourself? we
all came on this journey to reap advantages from serving you, and now
if you don't shoot, what may we expect?" i said, prove to me that i
shall not be thwarted again, and i will shoot or do anything to create
good-will. then appointing three men as sumunter's advisers to hold
him in restraint in case any wrong-headedness on his part should get
the mastery of him, i begged they would proceed. this proved
successful for the time. sumunter wrote me a letter, stating his
intention of abject servitude, and ratified it by presenting his spear
and shield, through the hands of the interpreter, for me to return to
him as an acknowledgment that i would henceforth forgive him; and we
again proceeded on the journey.

after travelling ten miles without seeing a single habitation or human
being of any sort, we arrived at a nullah, in which there were several
pools of bitter spring-water, and some egyptian geese swimming on
them. this place was called barham. on the right or northern side of
the line of our march was the hill-range, about ten miles distant, at
the foot of which, in the beds of small ravines, grew some belts of
the jujube-tree and hardy acacias; but to the south the land was all
sterile, and stretched away in a succession of little flat plains,
circumscribed by bosses or hillocks of pure white limestone rock,
which appeared standing unaffected by the weathering which had worn
down the plains that were lying between them. again these little
enclosed plains sank in gentle gradation to their centres, where
nullahs, like the one i was encamped upon, drained the land and refuse
debris to the south and eastward, possibly to join eventually the rhut
tug.

12th.--at 9 a.m. we were again in motion on our westward course,
rising by a gentle incline to about half-way between rhut tug and a
second wadi nogal farther on, called yubbe tug. here, at the
water-parting between these two large watercourses, was the tomb of
the great founder of these mighty nations, darud bin ismail, and an
excavated tumulus. there were also several bitter springs in the
neighbourhood, with stone enclosures and numerous flocks of sheep
tended by somali. on passing the tomb i scarcely remarked it, so
insignificant did it appear, whilst the somali paid no homage to it
whatever. but the tumulus excited more attention, and i was requested
to examine it. six years ago, the interpreter said, a somali who
wished to bury his wife in it, broke through its exterior, and found a
hollow compartment propped up by beams of timber, at the bottom of
which, buried in the ground, were several earthenware pots, some
leaden coins, a ring of gold such as the indian mussulman women wear
in their noses, and various other miscellaneous property.

i was very much struck with the sleekness of the sheep, considering
there appeared nothing for them to live upon; but i was shown amongst
the stony ground here and there a little green pulpy-looking weed, an
ice plant called buskale, succulent, and by repute highly nutritious.
it was on this they fed and throve. these dumba sheep--the fat-tailed
breed--appear to thrive on much less food, and can abstain longer from
eating, than any others. this is probably occasioned by the
nourishment they derive from the fat of their tails, which acts as a
reservoir, regularly supplying, as it necessarily would do, any sudden
or excessive drainage from any other part of their systems.

after crossing over this high land we began descending to the
westward, and at the completion of the twelfth mile dropped into a
nullah tributary to the yubbe tug, made a kraal for protection against
hyenas close to a pool of water, and spent the night. this plain was
called libbahdile (the haunt of lions).[17]

13th.--the air was so cold, the men could not bestir themselves until
after sunrise, when, to my great surprise and delight, without one
angry word or attempted impediment from the abban, we were on the move
at 8 a.m. i now fondly hoped the abban had really turned over a new
leaf, but was soon undeceived, and also disappointed. he was married
to a dulbahanta woman, and this wife, for he had two others, with her
family, was residing in that country. i was therefore, unawares to
myself, travelling directly on his home. hence these three consecutive
marches. gradually we descended into a broad valley, down the centre
of which meandered the yubbe tug, or the second wadi nogal of my
acquaintance. this formed a natural boundary-line, separating the
warsingali from the northern dulbahanta frontiers. where we first came
upon the nullah it was deep and broad, with such steep perpendicular
sides that camels could not cross it. we therefore turned suddenly
northward, and followed up its left bank till we turned its head,
which begins abruptly, and marched five miles to the yubbe kraals. had
this valley been blessed with a moderate quantity of rain, there is no
doubt it would have been available for agricultural purposes; and as
it was, there were more trees growing in the hollow here than in any
other place i had seen, and several flocks and herds were congregated
in it. whilst travelling to-day the interpreter narrated the
circumstances of a fight which the warsingali had with the dulbahantas
about ten years ago in this valley, in which it appeared the
dulbahantas were the aggressing party, having sent a foraging-party
over their frontier to lift some cattle. the warsingali, seeing this,
mustered their forces and repelled the enemy; but would not follow
them up, preferring rather to tease them into submission than to
engender a bloody contest. this they effected by exposing all their
flocks and herds to the view of the dulbahantas on the bank of the
impassable nullah, whilst they guarded its head and protected their
flank by stationing a strong party of warriors there. the dulbahantas,
tantalised at this tempting yet aggravating sight, for they had not
strength enough to cope with the warsingali in full force, waited
covetously gazing across the nullah for some time, and then retired in
such great disgust, they have never attempted to steal again.

when once ensconced in the new camp, the abban came to me with an air
of high importance, to announce that we were now on the dulbahanta
frontier, and that, if i wished to see their land, i must allow him to
precede me, and pave the way, taking the young prince abdullah with
him to magnify the purport of his mission, as the dulbahantas were a
terrible and savage nation, governed, not like the warsingalis, by an
old and revered chief, but by a young sultan whom nobody listened to.
moreover, the dulbahantas had sent word to say they had heard of my
marking the warsingali country out with paper, and would not admit me
on any consideration. besides which, it was a custom in the country
that strangers should ask permission to enter through the medium of an
abban, and as i had acted on that custom in the warsingali country, so
also must i do it here.

i was kept at this station eight days, sometimes hearing ominous
announcements of the terrible dulbahantas, sent to frighten me by the
abban, and sometimes amusing myself in other and various ways. the
dulbahantas could not conceive my motive for wishing to travel in
their land; no peddling arab, even, had ever ventured there, so why
should i desire to go? fortunately i had a good deal of employment
with my gun; for, besides gazelles, antelopes, a lynx, florikans, and
partridges, i shot many very beautiful little honey-birds, as well as
other small birds. of these former the most beautiful was the
_nectarinia habessinica_. it has an exceedingly gaudy plumage, that
glistens in metallic lustre as the rays of light strike upon its
various-coloured feathers. this is the more remarkable on a warm
sunshiny day, when the tiny bird, like a busy humble-bee, bowing the
slender plant with its weight, inserts his sharp curved bill into the
flower-bells to drink their honey-dew, keeping its wings the whole
time in such rapid motion as to be scarcely distinguishable.

without animal flesh i do not know what i should have done here. the
water was so nitrous i could not drink it. to quench my thirst, i
threw it in gulps down my throat; and rice, when boiled in it,
resembled salts and senna. after returning from sport one day, the
interpreter brought up one of the camel-drivers, to be punished for
having stolen some deer flesh when sent to clean it. he was a midgar,
or low-caste fellow, who does not object to indulge in cannibalism
when hard pressed by hunger. i would not decide the case myself, but
handed him over, much against his wish, to the _tender_ mercies of the
interpreter and two other men whom the sultan, at parting, appointed
judges on any sudden occasion. it was everybody's interest to make him
guilty, and therefore he was condemned to find two sheep, to be killed
and eaten in the camp. another case of theft, much more vexatious than
this, occurred when i first arrived here, and turned off some spare
camel-drivers, who took away all the packing-ropes with them, and i
have been obliged to employ the remaining men ever since in chewing
acacia bark into fibres to make new ones.

i was now becoming so much alarmed at the abban's delay and tricks,
that i wrote a letter to lieutenant playfair, assistant political
resident at aden, complaining of what he had done, saying i felt very
uncertain of being able to reach berbera by the time appointed, and
requesting him to send a letter of remonstrance to the sultan. this i
forwarded by a man called abdie, _via_ bunder gori. prudence would
have suggested my returning with the letter, for i had now received
intelligence that the abban was in his home, and after experience
gained by the tragedies on the coast, i could have expected no good
from him. but as long as life and time lasted, i was resolved to go
ahead.

it was very remarkable to see the great length of time animals in this
country can exist, even under hard work, without drinking water. in an
ordinary way, the somali water camels only twice a-month, donkeys four
times, sheep every fourth day, and ponies only once in two days, and
even object to doing it oftener, when the water is plentiful, lest the
animals should lose their hardihood. i do not think antelopes could
possibly get at water for several months together, as every drop of
water in the country is guarded by the somali. we were now in "the
land of honey," and the somali nomads constantly came to me to borrow
my english pickaxe for digging it out of the ground; for the bees of
this country, instead of settling in the boughs of trees, as they do
in england, work holes in the ground like wasps, or take advantage
more generally of chinks or fissures in the rocks to build their combs
and deposit their wax. it was a great treat to get a little of this
sweet nutriment, to counteract the salts which prevail in all the
spring waters of the interior. when out shooting specimens, i often
saw the somali chasing down the salt's antelopes on foot.

i killed many of them myself right and left, when running like hares,
with common shot, much to the astonishment of the somali, for they are
too small a mark for their bow-and-arrow shooting. the little
creatures cannot stand travelling in the mid-day sun, and usually lie
about under favouring trees which line the watercourses. knowing this
weakness, the cunning somali hunter watches him down from feeding to
his favourite haunts, and, after the sun shines strong enough, quietly
disturbs him; then, as he trots away to search for another shady bush,
they follow gently after to prevent his resting. in the course of an
hour or so, the terrified animal, utterly exhausted, rushes from bush
to bush, throwing itself down under each in succession, until at
length it gets captured.

somali, from their roving habits of life, are as keen and cunning
sportsmen as any in the world. they told me of many dodges they
adopted for killing elephants, ostriches, and gazelles, which they do
as follows:--if an elephant is ever seen upon the plains, a large body
of men assemble on foot, armed with spears, bows, and sharp
double-edged knives, with one man mounted on a white horse, to act as
teaser. this man commences by riding in front of the animal, to
irritate and absorb his entire attention by riding in repeated circles
just in front of him. when the huge beast shows signs of distress by
fruitlessly charging on his nimble adversary, the footmen rush in upon
him from behind, and hamstring him with their knives, and then with
great facility soon despatch him with their arrows and spears.

ostriches, again, are killed in two ways; the more simple one is by
finding out what places they usually resort to in search of food, and
then throwing down some tempting herb of strong poisonous properties,
which they eagerly eat and die from. the other method adopted in
catching them is not so easy, but is managed with great effect. the
ostrich is, as is generally known, a remarkably shy bird, and is so
blind at night it cannot feed. again, the somali pony, though
wonderfully hardy and enduring, is not swift; therefore, to
accommodate existing power to knowledge of these various weaknesses,
the somali provides himself with a pony, and provisions for two or
three days, and begins his hunt by showing himself at such a
considerable distance from the birds he has formed his design upon,
that they quietly stalk off, and he, at the same rate, follows after,
but never draws near enough to scare them out of sight of him. at
night, the birds stop in consequence of the darkness, but cannot feed.
he, on the other hand, dismounts to rest and feed with his pony, and
resumes the chase the following day. after the second or third day,
when he and the pony are as fresh as ever, the ostriches, from
constant fasting, become so weak, he is able to ride in amongst them,
and knock down one by one as many as may be in the flock. the flesh is
eaten, and the feathers are taken to the sea-coast for transportation
to the aden market. i once saw a donkey-load of feathers carried to
market that had been taken in this way.

there are two methods, also, of killing gazelles; the more usual one
is effected by two men walking into a bushy ground to search for them,
and when discovered, walking in such large circles around them as will
not scare them; gradually they draw their circles in, until a favoured
bush, down wind, is found, which the herd is most likely, when once
moved, to pass by, and behind this one of the men stops, with his bow
and arrows, whilst the second one, without ever stopping to create
alarm, continues drawing in the circles of circumvention until he
induces the gazelles to walk up to the bush his friend is concealed
in, when one or more may be easily shot. the other plan for killing
them is extremely artful, and is done on horseback, and therefore on
the open plain. fleet animals, like antelopes and gazelles, always
endeavour to head across their pursuers, no matter in which direction
they go. the somali, therefore, taking advantage of this habit, when
they wish to catch them on ponies, which are not half so swift as the
gazelles in fair open chase, economise their strength by directing
their animals' heads towards the leading gazelle, and thus inducing
the herd, as they continue heading on, to describe double the
circumference of ground their ponies have to traverse. in process of
time, the gazelles, by their extra exertions, begin to flag and drop,
and the hunters rush in upon them, and cut them up in detail.

20th.--to-day the young prince, abdullah, returned to say the
dulbahantas had been conferred with, and had shown the strongest
objections to my seeing their country, enumerating at the same time
all their reasonings, such as i had already heard; but added, as a
great concession on their part, as a particular favour they wished to
show to my abban, that i might be permitted to advance a little way to
the next valley; but then only on condition that i would surrender to
them the whole of my remaining property.

i now heard more particulars of the dulbahantas' fights, and the
manner in which they first originated. for full thirteen years they
had been disputing amongst themselves, and many cabals had sprung out
of it. whilst these intrigues were gaining ground, a minor chief,
named ali haram, with a powerful support in connections, about five
years ago determined on alienating himself from the yoke of the
government, which was headed by an old gerad, called mahamed ali, the
rightful and hereditary chief. since then the original kingdom has
been divided into two portions, called the northern and southern
dulbahantas; but although the northerners declare themselves
independent, the chief of the south still fights for his lawful
rights, and at this present time had driven the northerners, with all
their cattle and stock, to jid ali tug, the next valley beyond this,
which i was now desirous of visiting. ali haram was an old man, and
consequently incapacitated from taking an active part in these
tumultuous filibusterings; he had therefore, since his first accession
to power, deputed a son called mahamed ali gerad to act as regent in
his stead, and this was the man of whom the warsingali spoke to me at
bunder gori so disparagingly.

21st.--i was now preparing to start again westward, when an order came
from the abban to my men, that no property should accompany me,
excepting what little i felt disposed to part with in presents to the
dulbahantas; as an akil, by name husayn hadji, the senior man present
at jid ali, had decided, as a final measure, on seizing everything i
brought with me immediately i set foot in jid ali. though i had had
experience enough of the abban's tricks to see that this was merely a
farce, though a very useless and inconvenient one, i permitted the
arrangement rather than make a row and retard my progress, and set out
with the young prince, hamed, farhan, and two camels and drivers,
leaving imam and the other nine camels, with their drivers, behind, to
follow as soon as i should send back.

at the western extremity of the valley we came upon a small mound of
earth, all white and glistening, covered with nitre in an efflorescent
form, which shone so conspicuously in the sun, it could be seen at
many miles' distance; from the base of it a clear spring of water
trickled, so disagreeable in taste that no one, save somali, could
possibly drink it. now, emerging from the low land, we again left the
trees behind us, and rose by a well-beaten foot-track to the primary
level of the country, where stone and bare ground prevailed. each of
these elevations and depressions was a mere reflection of the other,
only varying more or less according to their size; and as my line was
directed due west, i always had the mountain-range at even distance on
the north, whilst every feature on the south remained the same. it was
monotonous in the extreme. at the fifth mile we came upon some springs
of bitter water, sunk in deep cavities in the earth, from which we
filled our water-skins, and travelled on till night; when, dark
overtaking us, we slipped into a hollow in the ground, called ali,
cooked a little rice with the water we had brought, and slept it out
till morning. distance, thirteen miles.

22d.--as soon as the morning was well aired with the sun, and the
black men had recovered from the torpor which the cold seemed to
produce on them as it does on lizards and snakes, i struck out for jid
ali, hoping to surprise the abban, and thereby counteract, if
possible, his various machinations. but this was not to be done. at
the thirteenth mile, as we were descending in full view of jid ali, at
a place called birhamir, i was met by the akil husayn hadji himself,
who, instead of showing any disposition to hinder my approach, was
very affable and kind in manner. he politely begged me to remain where
i was and rest the day, and on the morrow he would take me to the tug
(river) below. he had never felt indisposed towards me; but one galed
ali, an akil superior to himself, was averse to my proceeding further.
unfortunately for the somali, their lies are very transparent, and
they were too fond of uttering falsehoods ever to be trusted. i
neither believed in the existence of galed ali, nor in his own kind
intentions towards me, and therefore begged him to prove it by
allowing me to pass. this began a long discussion. the wars were
raging. the dulbahantas would not let me see their country, as they
could not see why an englishman should wish to travel where even
beggars were afraid to go; and then followed a hundred other excuses,
all of which i rejected as freely as he advanced them.

then at length, somali fashion, the true meaning of his unwelcome
visit transpired. he then said--"well, if you have no fear of
anything, and will join us in our fight, to represent your nation's
disposition in our favour, i will give you as many horses as you may
wish to have, and a free passage to berbera, as soon as it is
concluded." this was certainly a tempting offer, as i told him; but i
said, although, as far as i was individually concerned, there was
nothing which would please me better, still, being a servant of the
government, i could not represent anything they had not sanctioned;
and, moreover, i was bound to be at berbera by a certain date, which i
could not if i went southwards with them. they argued, there would be
no delay in finishing the battles, if i merely showed myself as a
representative of the english, for the enemy would retire before a
shot was fired, concluding that the opinion of the world was against
them. they all declared the war had lasted so long, and had been so
harassing, they wished ardently to put an end to it. i told them, in
my opinion, it was all their own fault; that they ought never to have
commenced the war, for the chief they now recognised was a mere
usurper--a traitor, in fact, who ought to be punished.

the abban's mother, mrs awado, of whom i knew nothing until now, and
who was living at birhamir, in a hut close by, then hastened towards
us, joined our party, and interrupted the conversation by clapping her
hands and beating her knees, exclaiming, in wild dismay and terrifying
words, "oh! why have you come to this land, where there are no laws,
or any respect for life? you don't know what these people are you've
come amongst! come with me now to my place; rest the night, and
refresh yourself: tomorrow morning your abban will come and conduct
you safely on your way." this was a climax to the day's journey; the
men smelt grub in an instant, and hurried off with the old lady to
some empty stone enclosures (sheepfolds), and at once unburdened and
"lay-to" for the night. as before, i had many conferences about the
the wadi nogal, which lieutenant burton had desired me to investigate,
but could obtain no satisfactory information. they said there were
many wadis in nogal, but the largest one was in the mijjertaine
country, where its waters were deep and large, with extensive forest
around it, frequented by numerous herds of elephants. those in advance
of my line of march, on the road to berbera, were all mere nullahs,
like yubbe tug, or jid ali tug, and were not used for agricultural
purposes. however, in the southern dulbahanta country, south by west
of this, at a distance of five or six marches, there was a nullah,
with many springs in it, which united in certain places, and became a
running stream. this i now, from subsequent inquiries and inspection
of lieut. cruttenden's map,[18] suspect is the watercourse set down in
my instructions as the wadi nogal. this watercourse, i was assured,
bounded the nogal or white stony country on the west, and divided it
from the haud or red stoneless country, which is occupied in most part
by the southern dulbahantas, who have "the finest grazing-grounds in
the world, and possess incalculable numbers of camels and horses
(meaning ponies), and cows, sheep, and goats; whilst the game which
roamed about there covered the ground like flocks of sheep." of these
the largest were giraffes, rhinoceroses, and lions, elephants being
confined to the mijjertaine country, the koolies hills to the south of
berbera, and the webbe shebeli, or haines river.[19]

23d.--early in the morning, accompanied by husayn ali, who opposed me
no longer, we commenced our descent to the valley of jid ali, an
expansive flat several miles in breadth, fuller and better wooded in
the north than any place i had yet seen, but tapering away to the
south and eastwards, until it became lost to sight in the barren
plateau. after marching a mile or so, we found the abban hastening to
meet us, in high dudgeon with my men for having advanced contrary to
his mandates, before he had time to arrive and smooth the way; for now
the great impressive spell, his influence, which i was to understand
could alone save me from the terrors of the unruly dulbahantas, was
proved to me of secondary importance, and he, consequently,
insignificant. this occasioned a little delay; but at last, the abban
becoming reconciled to this defeat of his projected plans, we were
permitted to resume the march, and, soon arriving in the bed of the
valley, encamped near the watercourse of jid ali tug, on the meridian
of mai. the water in the nullah extended upwards of half a mile, when
it became absorbed in the thirsty soil. it consisted of a chain of
pools, connected by little runners, the produce of some bitter
springs, and made the country green in consequence. attracted by my
dates and rice--for i had brought no other property save my
specimen-boxes and ammunition--many of the dulbahantas forgot their
occupations in war, and flocked around my camp all day and night,
bothering my servants incessantly whilst cooking, and begging presents
from me every moment. i remained here three days, trying to negotiate
with the head men for permission to advance, but obtained no practical
result. they insisted, for even coming thus far, that i should give
them as many cloths and material as i had given to the warsingali, for
they would take no less. when told all my worldly goods did not admit
of such a payment, they quietly said, i had come there against their
will; they did not believe me; and if i did not open my boxes to their
inspection, they would smash them up and help themselves. this was an
everyday occurrence, which became only insignificant, as it was
repeated without being carried into execution. most of the time the
abban was away, stopping at his home, and no business could be done. i
therefore took short excursions about the valley shooting, and
inspecting the various habitations.

animals were more abundant, in consequence of the greater extent of
water; and i shot gazelles, little saltiana antelopes, hares, egyptian
geese, rock-pigeons, ducks and teal, and snipe and partridge, besides
a choice collection of small birds. in one place i found a small stone
hut, occupied by an old man who had once been on a pilgrimage to
mecca, and had seen the art of cultivating ground. he was now turning
his experience to account by growing jowari (a species of millet), and
effected it with some success; for he had two small enclosures, which
he irrigated by cuts from the nullah, that produced grain, which grew
from eight to nine feet high. he was loud in praise of the advantages
which he derived from his farm, saying it saved his flocks, and
assisted him in the means of food when his ewes were pregnant, or
giving lamb. i patronised this farmer, and offered to lend him some
tools for digging with, when he said he did not want that so much as
some hints about sowing, and wished i would send a man to instruct
him. farhan, who was with me, delighted at the prospect of showing his
skill in any manner--for he styled himself professor of all things--at
once took the hint, and bargained to do a day's work, and furnish him
with some wrinkles for his future guidance, for the payment of a goat,
which was readily agreed to.

the people here were highly superstitious, and, like all ignorant
races, very punctilious in their ceremonies of worship. as _true_
mussulmans, they were constant in their time of prayer, and abused my
interpreter for never saying his. when i made him cut the deer's
throats a little lower down the throat than their canons permit, to
save the specimen, they spat on the ground to show their contempt, and
abused him heartily. if i threw date-stones in the fire (the seed of
paradisiacal food), they looked upon it as a sacrilege. they were also
very suspicious. if i walked up and down the same place to stretch my
legs, they formed councils of war on my motives, considering i must
have some secret designs upon their country, or i would not do it, as
no man in his senses could be guilty of working his legs
unnecessarily.

considering all the northerners were said to have been driven up here
by the war, i was much surprised to see so few habitations or flocks
in the valley; all there were consisted in a few kraals scattered over
the plain, which were constantly moved as soon as each plot of ground
in turn was eaten up by the cattle. in changing ground, these nomads
pack up everything on their camels, mat and stick, hut and all, and
placing the wife, with perhaps a baby also, on a donkey, march to any
unoccupied watering-place they can find. their food is very limited,
except in the rainy season, when milk prevails: in consequence of
this, it being now the dry season, my servants accounted for their
increasing appetite for my dates. some of the poorer men are said to
pass their whole lives without tasting any flesh or grain, but to live
entirely on sour milk, wild honey, or gums, as they may chance to come
across them, and they are almost naked; but notwithstanding this,
disease is scarcely known, and excepting in a few cases of endemic
ophthalmia, which appears to attack the country periodically, at
intervals of two or three years, i never heard of any. the climate was
very delightful at this season, and the nights so cold i had to wrap
myself well up in flannels. but perhaps that which best illustrates
the healthiness of the country and pleasantness of its atmosphere, is
the fact that i, although i had no bedstead, but always slept on the
ground, never pitched my tent a single day in the interior, and
neither wore a hat or shoe throughout the journey, save on one or two
occasions, when, severely stabbed with thorns, i put on a sandal. i
never knew a moment's illness.

25th.--this evening, husayn hadji, who i now found out was
brother-in-law to sumunter, approached me as i came in from shooting,
and said, "we are surprised to see you return alive; did you not meet
some armed men when you were shooting?" i replied, "no, not one."
"then," said he, "there are many men come here, who from the first
have forbid your coming into this country; they are under no control,
but, in open defiance of the gerad, do and act just as they like:
indeed, every head man is a gerad here, and those who are strongest
carry the day." this was the prelude to another farce; presently the
men came of whom husayn hadji spoke, and, surrounding my camp,
boisterously demanded to know what i was doing in their country
against their orders. a violent altercation then ensued. they must
have all my property given up at once, or they would take it by force;
and remained trying to bully me into compliance, until i said i would
sooner die than give them anything. seeing me determined, they then
walked off, saying i had not one night left to live, for they would
return and kill me after dark. the place was now getting too hot to be
pleasant, for the fact was, we were so near the watering-place, that
my camp offered a convenient and tempting lounge for all the idle
blackguards of the country to assemble at.

26th.--i sent orders back for the rear traps to come on as quick as
possible, and at the suggestion of my servants, who were just as tired
as myself of these incessant provocations, changed camp to a place
three miles farther up the valley, much more remote from water, but
nearer to the abban's home, by which i hoped i should be able to get
at him easier; for the aggravating wretch, whenever i sent messages to
recall him, invariably returned plausible excuses, showing the
necessity of his having stopped away, and as repeatedly said he would
not fail in coming immediately; but at the same time, as the sequence
showed, never intending to do so.

it would be useless, as well as painful, to narrate in detail all the
daily and hourly incidents which occurred in the next few days whilst
i was detained here by the artful and dishonest machinations of this
vile-conditioned man, from whom i could never get one true word, and
whose absence, although i was striving to induce his coming to me,
really seemed a relief. a wicked feeling was almost coming over me,
which made me shudder again when i reflected more calmly on what my
mind was now dilating. he seemed to me only as an animal in satanical
disguise; to have shot him would have given me great relief, for i
fairly despaired of ever producing any good effect upon his mind.
again i tried the old scheme of forcing him to leave me, and even
begged an akil of the dulbahantas, offering him large rewards, to be
my guide to berbera. this, as might be imagined, provoked a severe
row. the man i was endeavouring to seduce to favour me was one of the
gang of forty thieves, and as birds of a feather all dulbahantas
flocked together to assist the victim of my displeasure; for sumunter
was, by his intermarriage with these northerners, naturalised amongst
them. however, i had my wicked will, by relating, in presence of all
his now rapidly congregating friends (a row always brings a crowd),
the whole of his misdemeanours since he first came with me to this
country, and threatened him with the lasting displeasure of our
government, and ruin to his trade at aden, if he still persisted in
his tricks. this brought matters home much closer than anybody liked
to hear, and set all parties cogitating on what course had best be
followed. i now retired to cool myself by shooting, and on returning
again was met by the abban, interpreter, and many dulbahanta akils,
who, now trying the conciliating dodge, came to report the good news
that a victory had been gained by the northerners, and the southerners
were in full retreat to their provinces, by which the road to berbera
would be open to my proceeding onwards. moreover, the rear traps had
arrived at abi, by which accident everything seemed to harmonise. this
sounded very cheering for the moment, but i soon was damped again.

i wanted to move at once, and lose no time in taking full benefit of
the opportunity thus offered; but this, like every other proposal that
i made, was immediately checked by a cruel device, as unforeseen as it
was objectionable. hassan had not come with the ponies he went after
from rhut tug; i must therefore, before advancing, send back to the
farther frontier of the warsingali to purchase, by bills on aden, five
ponies at thirty dollars a-head, to be afterwards given away in
presents to chiefs on the road for allowing me to pass through their
territories, and this, at a minimum calculation, would occupy a
fortnight's time, and even then i should have to go single-handed,
without a servant, instrument, or article of any bulk with me. of
course this, as the abban knew, i never would consent to. on no
account would i suffer my being separated from my men and property
when the time for my return to berbera was so close at hand; and,
moreover, without the instruments the journey would be of no avail.
row succeeded row when i pushed matters closely; the abban sometimes
affected repentance, but more often became defiant, and forbade
anybody's assisting me without his entire consent. such, in fact, were
the effects of these angry ebullitions of temper on the minds of my
people, that the young prince abdullah, fearing to be witness to them
any more, took his leave and departed home.

31st.--at length the rear traps arrived, but one camel, having been
taken ill on the march this morning whilst coming from abi, was
slaughtered to "_save_" his flesh, and devoured by my hungry men. as
soon as everything had arrived, and the men were made aware of my
intention to push forward, they requested their discharge, affecting
fear to enter on a strange land, but in reality seeing i had no cloths
left to pay them, as afterwards transpired. this deficiency i visited
on the abban, who, in trying to excuse himself for inefficiency in his
protectorship, meekly said he had been grieved to see the very rapid
decline of my property, but he could not help it, as i had so many
thieves in my employment!!! mrs awado now came over from birhamir,
bringing a sheep and some ghee as a present for me; but i refused
taking anything from the relative of the abban, and this appeared to
grieve her much. she said she had heard of all my disputes with
sumunter, her son, and had remonstrated with him about them; he was a
proud man, and easily led away by vanity. she could see his being at
variance with me would not end to his advantage on his return to aden,
and tried coaxing him to journey with me; but at the same time told me
he would have to be well upon his guard, as in former years he had
married clandestinely with a damsel of the rheer hamaturwa, a
sub-tribe of the habr gerhajis, who occupy the hill-range overlooking
bunder heis; and her loss to those people would be avenged at once, if
he ever came within their power. the rheer hamaturwa had heard of my
intention to journey westwards, and would be in readiness to descend
upon and intercept our march, kill sumunter, and destroy the whole of
us; indeed, they had sent messages to that effect.





                          chapter iv.

meditations among the tombs--a fracas--the return march--the
north-east monsoon--relief from persecution--interesting animals--gori
again--shooting a woman--arrival at aden--fresh projects--arrangements.



3d january 1855.--during these three days i visited a ruined musjid
and a cemetery, which, though much resembling the one at rhut in every
respect, was said to be of more recent origin, and built by
mohammedans. on my walking amongst the tombs, and inspecting the
crosses[20] at their heads, the interpreter rebuked me for
sacrilegious motives, and desired me to come away, lest the
dulbahantas should find it out, and be angry with me. besides this, i
daily tried to draw sumunter, like a badger, from his hut, which was
four miles distant from my tent, but without effect. he and his wife,
two dwarf sisters (little bits of things, who, the interpreter said,
were too small to be of any use), and some children, all lived
together in a small beehive hut, so low that they had to crawl in on
all-fours, and so small that it was marvellous how they could turn
round in it. at length to-day he arrived in a sullen angry mood, and
said, haughtily, he was displeased at my trying to force him into
compliance, as if i had the power to make him move unless he chose. it
was impossible to keep one's temper under such constant provocation;
so i abused him vehemently, and warned him off the camp, again
repeating he had abused his commission, as well as the government
authorities who engaged him,--and entreated he would "get away," and
let me take my chance of proceeding how i could, for his presence
simply made my position one of purgatory. he laughed in scorn, wishing
to know if i thought i could do anything without him,--and said he had
only to turn his back an instant, and the dulbahantas were ready to
devour me. i still persisted; and then he said, "if you say go once
more, i take you at your word; and see you to the consequences."

my resolution was fixed; for i plainly saw i could not by any
possibility be worse off. he now tried frightening me by assembling
the dulbahantas to confirm his words, making them say they only
permitted my residence there out of the love they bore to their
brother sumunter, and that they certainly would kill me if he once
left the place. they did not fear guns. the english could not reach
them; besides, their fathers had driven christians from these lands;
and if an army was to attack them, they would assemble so many
cavalry, and ride in such rapidity around them, that their gunners
could not take aim in consequence of the clouds of dust which this
feat would occasion. in addition to this, they thought the english
only efficacious behind walls; else, why did they not take revenge
upon the arabs at lahej, two years ago, for the murder of an officer?
they had often heard of the english threatening and preparing to do
it, but somehow they never carried their intention into execution. i
treated these vain bombastic words with the contempt which they
deserved,--but said, i only wanted sumunter to take me on, or
otherwise to leave me to my fate. they then tried weakening my party
by bribing farhan to side with them and leave; but the noble-hearted
seedi disclosed their treachery, and gallantly said he would share
misfortunes with me, and fight, if necessary, to the last extremity.

imam, tame-hearted indian, got in a dreadful fright, and implored i
would compromise the matter; for by this time all the camels had been
driven away; and the warsingali moved off with sumunter, saying i
brought the rupture by my obstinacy on my own head, and that as soon
as they were out of sight, the dulbahantas would walk in and kill us
all in a heap. i then loaded all the guns, and, giving one to each of
the servants, sat on the boxes waiting to see the up-shot. i was
clearly outmanoeuvred--unable to move or get anything--but still was,
to use their own expression, "obstinate." after proceeding a certain
distance, the retiring band, with sumunter at their head, sitting
fully equipped with spear and shield on his war-steed, came to a halt,
and invited the interpreter to meet them, presuming, they said, there
might be some mistake, and therefore they wished to open negotiations
afresh. sumunter then gave me back my own words, saying, "if the sahib
would only say he wished me to take him to berbera, i will give some
small presents to the akils of the dulbahantas as a passport for him,
and proceed at once;" for they were only endeavouring to feel my
disposition towards them, and did not intend desertion, if i was not
irredeemably incensed against them. they then came back, and work
began afresh, by the distribution of presents, which, as is usual when
no man can bear to see the smallest trifle slip from his grasp to be
given to another, was a matter of no small difficulty in adjusting. if
the dulbahantas did not succeed in skinning me of all my effects, they
naturally thought the next tribe would; and a whole day was consumed
in wrangling and disputing how much they should get. this ended by my
giving one musket, thirteen tobes, and my reserve silk turban; and now
i was at liberty to quit jid ali.

11th.--at 10 a.m. we were loaded, and commenced the journey westward;
whilst the abban said he would bid his friends adieu at home, and
bring five horses with him to biyn hable, where he would meet us on
the following day. the track led us across a flat alluvial plain,
still in the valley, which was well covered with a thick growth of
acacias, and dry short grass, nipped short by cattle. after walking
five miles, we arrived at our destination, not far from a well, and
made a ring-fence of prickly boughs.

here for the last time i boiled the thermometer, to ascertain the
altitude of the plateau along my line of march, and found its average
height was 3913 feet: the minimum, at rhut tug, being 3077 feet--and
the maximum, at yubbe tug, 4498 feet.

the following day two dulbahantas paid us a visit, and demanded to
know by whose authority we had come upon their grounds; we were
trespassers, and must pay our footing. the ground was theirs, and they
recognised no authority over them. what i had given at the last place
was no concern of theirs, but i must give them also a quantity of
cloth equivalent to it. this being refused as a preposterous
imposition, they turned hastily away, and, tossing their heads, said,
i might soon expect to see them again in larger numbers, when they
would help themselves. moreover, for my satisfaction, they could
assure me that a number of men, who had learned which road i was bent
on travelling, were fast gathering on ahead, to oppose my advance. in
the evening the abban arrived, bringing only two ponies with him.

17th.--it would be needless to recount all the varied incidents of the
next five days which were wasted here, by the thousand and one stories
which the abban produced to fritter away my time near his home, and
swindle me out of my property. the time had now arrived when by
appointment i should have been at berbera; and as i was not then aware
at what time the fair usually broke up, i felt much afraid of being
too late to join my companions. sometimes sumunter raised my hopes by
saying he would certainly proceed on a certain date; and when that day
arrived, the journey was deferred again, but not without severe rows,
so exactly like the past ones as to be unworthy of description. one
day we were ready, and i was to pass through any people that might
fall in the way by giving large credits on aden under his security,
when the tide was turned again in another moment by the arrival of
some accomplices, who dropped in like unexpected evils, to say the
southern dulbahantas had gained a great victory, slaughtering men and
cattle, and the road to berbera would be thronged with people, so that
advance would be impossible for the present. this was a settler to my
westward march; and now i thought of escaping from this land of
robbers by turning northwards, and marching over the hills to bunder
heis, where i could either ship off, or march along the coast to
berbera.

negotiations were then set on foot with the rheer hamaturwa, and
several of their akils came at my bidding, but were as implacable
about obliging a stranger as any of their neighbours. the whole
distance was not three days' travel; still they said i should not see
their country, and acknowledged themselves a lawless band, who would
take everything from me if i ventured there: adding, if the warsingali
and dulbahantas, who were stronger than themselves, would only
withdraw from me one day, they would come down at once, and demolish
my whole camp. they then demanded cloths for the trouble i had given
them, but, not receiving any, retired in huge disgust.

18th.--in final despair i faced about, and marched north-easterly, by
a new route, to reach bunder gori again, to ship for aden, as there
only could i be certain of finding a vessel to convey me over the
gulf. after six miles' march across the head of the valley, we arrived
at mirhiddo kraal, on elevated ground, and found a large party
assembled there. some of them were the rheer hamaturwa, with whom i
tried again for permission to cross their hills, but this time by the
gap at the head of the valley in front of bunder jedid. this they were
ready to permit, and give security of passage to my people, if i gave
them all my remaining cloths; but they thought i should not find a
vessel there, which settled the question. i had no time to lose, and,
moreover, should save my cloths by continuing on the line i was
travelling. for though i should have to cross the hills where they
were occupied by the habr gerhajis, in the new way my track would pass
so near to the warsingali frontier, that that tribe would not have
strength enough to demand anything from me, and passport fees are only
given in such places to the extent to which they can be enforced.

the other people i met here were some dulbahantas arming for the
fight. they said they were 4000 strong in cavalry, and were
slaughtering sheep wholesale for provision on the road. each man
carried a junk of flesh, a skin of water, and a little hay, and was
then ready for a long campaign, for they were not soft like the
english (their general boast), who must have their daily food; they
were hardy enough to work without eating ten days in succession, if
the emergency required it. here a second camel was on the point of
dying, when his flesh was saved from becoming carrion by a knife being
passed across his throat.

21st.--the abban slipped away on the 19th, when i was out
specimen-hunting, and would not come again till to-day, and then even
returned to give his wife a last salute, permitting me to advance to a
watercourse called hanfallal, whilst he would join me on the following
day. this day we accomplished ten miles, and made a kraal about four
miles north of our old line of march.

22d.--as the abban did not keep his promise, and none of us knew the
road, i now tried to prevail on his mother awado, who was tending her
flocks close by, to be my guide, which she readily consented to do, as
she was anxious herself to go to bunder gori. the water found here was
in a circular cleft of limestone, sixty feet below the surface, which
was so small, only one person at a time could descend to it; and the
supply was so limited, i was obliged to keep my men down there all
night, to be the first for drawing in the morning. gazelles were very
abundant, and in the evening we were visited by a very singular-looking 
canine animal, which unfortunately i could not get a shot at. it was a
little less in size than the crocuta hyena, but inclined rather more,
in its general shape, to a wolf than a hyena. the body was a pure
black, like the black tibet wolf, but the tail was tipped with white.
i am not aware that this animal has ever been described.

23d.--at the usual starting-hour the abban arrived, with two ponies
belonging to his brother-in-law, husayn ali, but which he tried to
pass off as his own, being ever very anxious to make me believe he was
a large stock proprietor, to magnify his importance. but,
unfortunately for him, the interpreter, who was as treacherous a man
as any of the breed, although he often confounded me by his innate
deceit, also peached at times upon his brother sumunter. the abban, on
seeing his mother equipped and ready on her donkey to go with me,
scolded her heartily for presuming to undertake the journey without
his leave, and sent her home faster than she came. we now commenced
the march, and travelled five miles diagonally across some low spurs
of hills, and encamped in the evening in a broad, deep, dry nullah, at
a place called dalmalle. we brought water with us, and fortunate it
was so, for none could be found anywhere near the camp.

24th.--we started early in the morning, ascending the hill-range by a
steep winding footpath up one of its ridges, which, in respect to its
barrenness and soil, resembled the descent i had from yafir. after
completing eleven miles' march, the caravan crested the hill opposite
ras[21] galweni, travelled a short way on the flat of the summit, and
encamped in the evening amongst some thick jungle on its north or
seaward side, at a kraal called gobamire.

immediately on arriving, as we commenced to unload the camels, a
number of men who were occupying that district--the urus sage section
of the habr gerhajis tribe--seized the camels by their heads, and
demanded their customary fees, at the same time boisterously
gesticulating that they would help themselves if their request was not
complied with. farhan enjoyed the row in the boisterous characteristic
manner of a seedi--began dancing frantically the negro war-dance,
cocking his gun, and pointing it at everybody by turns; whilst
sumunter and the other warsingali began thumping them with their
clubs, and swearing a fearful vengeance would be wrought upon them by
their tribe, who were living within an hour or two's call, should they
not desist. the fact was, my men knew their power here, and, guided
only by animal passions, enjoyed showing it. the poor discomfited urus
sage now slunk off like defeated dogs, or schoolboys returning from a
fight, just wishing to know if they were only to be considered in the
light of women, who could not maintain their own right, and, snarling
and snapping, threatened they would return again in stronger force
before the morning.

we then unloaded, and lay-to for the night. immediately on reaching
the top of this range, a most interesting and novel sight was
presented to our view. we stepped in one instant from constant
sunshine into constant clouds, and saw what accounted for the dense
verdure of the north, as well as the extreme barrenness of the south
side of the hills. for two months we had not seen the vestige of a
cloud, or felt a drop of rain, and now we were at once launched into
the middle of the "dairti" or north-east monsoon, which had been
pouring for some time previously against the north face of the
mountain, and was arrested there by it. it reminded me at once of that
marked phenomenon with which all travellers in the himalaya mountains,
who spend their "hot-weather" season at chini, on the banks of the
sutlege river, to escape rain, must be acquainted, when the clouds of
the great indian monsoon envelop all the mountain-range for months
together on the weather or south-west side, and hang suspended on the
top of a high hill in sight of that place, but never pass over,
looking as if the mountain was too high to be surmounted by them, when
trying to reach the dry plateaux of tibet. the clouds were rolling in
thick successive volumes at our feet, and obscured the view below us.

25th.--we were detained until noon in consequence of the abban's
ponies, which had gone astray, and until then could not be found. in
the meanwhile the urus sage came again, and tried to prevent us
loading, on the same plea as yesterday, but without effect; but when
we were starting, a compromise was effected on condition they would
escort us down the hill and guide the way. the road was steep and very
slippery, so that the camels could hardly get along, and this was
further increased by the thick strong green jungle-bushes, as well as
rocks and other difficulties incidental to mountain travelling with
such large and ungainly animals as laden camels. at the fourth mile we
found a large roomy cave under a rock, and put up for the night. sheep
had been kept here, and the place was so full of fleas that the ground
was literally browned with them. i never saw such an astonishing
quantity congregated in one place; but we soon disposed of them by
burning certain boughs, which the somali justly said was a specific
remedy against them.

26th and 27th.--during these two days we descended by a tortuous
winding footpath under no mean difficulties, and finally arrived,
after twelve miles' marching, at a place called hundurgal, situated in
the hollow of a watercourse which divides the warsingali from the habr
gerhajis frontiers, and transmits its waters to the gulf at ras
galweni. during the journey the somali pointed out some of their
richest gum-trees, of which the finest in order is a species of
frankincense, called by them falafala, or luban maiti. the gum of this
tree is especially valued by the somali women for fumigating purposes,
which they apply to their bodies by sitting over it, when ignited, in
the same manner as cashmeres sit over their little charcoal-pots to
keep themselves warm when resting on their travels. they enshroud
themselves in a large wrapper, place a pot with the burning gum
between their legs, and allow the perfume to rise to every portion of
their body simultaneously. we gave our guides five cloths for escort,
and sent them away.

i was informed by my men that under lee of ras galweni there is a
better harbour than any on the whole coast-line, having deep water
close in to the shore, but, being neutral ground, the warsingali will
not allow anybody to occupy it. they do not allow the habr gerhajis to
do so, as they would monopolise the trade; and they will not take it
themselves, as their sultan sagely remarks it would draw all their
force to one side of their possessions, and thus leave the other
exposed to attack from the mijjertaines. now the dulbahantas are
obliged to come to bunder gori if they want to traffic with outer
nations, but were the habr gerhajis at galweni, this custom would be
drawn from them.

28th.--the inexpressible delight i felt at snuffing the fresh sea-air,
and being comparatively free from the tyranny of my persecutor
sumunter, was truly indescribable; and i felt so impatient to end this
useless journey, and join my friends for the larger and more promising
one, i could hardly restrain my spirits. i stepped out before the
caravan was ready, and began the journey alone, when presently a rapid
fire, the discharge of a six-barrel revolver, attracted my attention.
this was done by the abban, who said that whilst travelling there his
life was in jeopardy from the habr gerhajis, in consequence of an old
feud he had contracted with them, on account of which they had
forbidden this road to him. he thought to frighten them by the report
of firearms, but it seemed to have the opposite effect, for many men
at once gathered around the caravan, and for the time prevented its
onward course. as usual, they wanted me not only to pay for travelling
in their country, but to liquidate their claim on the abban, as i had
brought him there, and only out of consideration for the respect they
felt towards me, they permitted his passage in safety.

they might as well have tried to skin a flint as obtain anything from
me, and i told them so, for sumunter had fleeced me of all my effects.
this parley concluded, we travelled on without any further
molestation, and, crossing over the foot of some low spurs, arrived at
noon in a broad watercourse on the maritime plain to eat some
breakfast.

here i shot and stuffed a very interesting rat, with a bushy tail,
very much resembling the little gilleri squirrel of the indian plains,
but plumper in face and body, like a recently born rabbit. i had seen
many of them in rocks about the hill's side, but until now had not
secured a good specimen.[22] again at this place i saw those large
black canine animals with white-tipped tail, but could not get a shot:
there were three hunting together, like jungle dogs in india. after
refreshing ourselves we resumed the march, and travelled along the
sandy shore eastward to a halting-place called farjeh, completing a
march of twelve miles.

29th.--this day we completed our journey by marching into gori, when i
again took occupation of the old fort. an answer from the government
at aden to my appeal against the sultan and abban had now arrived, and
affected sumunter severely. he was ready to sink into the earth, and
said to me, "oh, why did you not whip me when i was in fault? i could
have borne that well, but writing to the english at aden is more than
i can bear. what will be the consequences now if i return to aden?" i
said i could not answer for it, as it was now beyond my control, and
if he went over there he must take his chance; but i strongly advised
his not going at all. "indeed," i said, "i wish you would depart from
me at once. from the first, i told you i was obliged, by order, to
write accurate accounts of everything as it happened, and the english,
as you have often said yourself, are remarkable for not telling lies."
the sultan, into whose hands the letter first went, would not show
himself, but remained in the distant jungles, although i sent
repeatedly for him to converse concerning sumunter.

the buggalow in which i came from aden was now anchored in bunder
gori. it had made a voyage somewhere in the meanwhile, but the captain
had been afraid to go to aden in consequence of the salt question, in
which sumunter had made him confederate, fearing lest i might have
since written to the authorities there about it. however, i now wanted
to hire it again, and made sundry overtures to the captain, who at
first showed a disposition to treat, hoping thereby i should forgive
him; but he was finally hindered from doing so by the insidious
machinations of sumunter, who doubtless was afraid by this means of
collecting at aden more witnesses against himself. sumunter now saw
his position clearly, and must have felt equally with myself it was a
great pity the letter of reproof from the brigadier of aden[23] did
not arrive sooner, and keep him on a course of rectitude, for he was
obliged to return to aden and take his chance, as there he had not
only a wife and family, but it was the headquarters of all his
mercantile transactions. during this time, whilst i was in the old
fort, an odd accident occurred to an akil's wife. she was playing with
my interpreter, who, for a frolic, snatched up one of my six-barrelled
revolver pistols and gave her chase. suddenly she darted into the room
i was sitting in, bounced on a bench and poked her tail in my man's
face. he, not knowing the pistol was loaded, pulled at the trigger,
and discharged the contents of two barrels at once into her fleshy
projection. in an instant their fun came to an end, and great
consternation ensued. she thought she must die from it, and bolted off
home to give up the ghost. her husband now came and clamoured for
revenge--her value was so-and-so, and my man must pay it. the
interpreter, hearing this, came crying to me, and wished to know if i
thought she would die; for should she do so, he, by the laws of the
land, would have to pay her price. i said i could not tell without
seeing her wounds, but, under any circumstances, the bullets ought to
be extracted. this appeared to them still more alarming than ever.
they did not wish me to inspect the wounds, and the woman herself was
very bashful. however, the sahib was the only surgeon present, and
votes gave me the practice. it was certainly very amusing to witness
the struggle between virtue and necessity, and the operation was so
far satisfactory that i succeeded in extracting one of the balls. the
other ball, however, was so deeply imbedded i could not find a probe
that would reach it. fortunately it was not fired in a dangerous
direction, and the ball being small, i thought it would not occasion
her any serious inconvenience. in short, i set their minds easy on
that score, though it did not keep their tongues quiet from
importunate begging. i was now dreadfully impatient to get away, but
day by day i had to suffer disappointment. i was assured by sumunter
he was doing everything in his power to facilitate it, and as often
told by the interpreter, when he had gone away, that he was doing
nothing of the sort, but, on the contrary, had sent to the interior to
get three ponies, which would make five with what he had, the
complement required by lieutenant burton, to make a present to him on
arrival, as a bribe to overlook his faults. i besought he would desist
from this hopeless speculation, as time was now more precious than any
other matter. still he persisted, and in a fortnight's time the
animals arrived, and then, without further trouble, we chartered a
vessel for thirty-five dollars, twelve times the fare i paid for
coming over, with the whole vessel to myself; and embarked with eight
camels and five ponies on the 15th february 1855. after five days'
sailing we anchored in aden harbour, and no sooner did the "let go the
anchor" sound, than, somali fashion, overjoyed at my release from
three and a half months' persecution, i took a header into the sea,
and hastily swam ashore to hurry off and meet old friends.

after the first greetings were over, and i had delivered for report
all my sketch-notes[24] of the journey, as well as maps and
collections, which latter were sent to the public museum in calcutta,
a discussion took place as to the disposal of the abban, who, i now
found out, was not singular in the way of treating his clients, for
herne had been writing over complaints constantly about his man. i was
averse to punishing him, from the simple fact of having brought him
over; but my commandant thought otherwise, and that he had better be
punished, if for no other reason than to set a good moral example to
the others.[25]

against my inclination i was appointed to be sumunter's prosecutor,
and with my servants as witnesses, a verdict of guilty was speedily
effected against him in the aden police court. he was then sentenced
to two months' imprisonment, and to pay the sum of 200 rupees, or,
failing to do that within the given time, he would be further
subjected to imprisonment, with hard labour, for six months more, and
was to be banished with his family for ever after the present
punishment should cease.

i now advised lieutenant burton, after my late defeat in travelling,
that it would be highly essential to the success of the great
expedition that we should be escorted by some somali picked from the
aden police force, as by this means alone should we have men on whom
we could depend. he also was aware of this fact, from having been
successfully taken himself into harar by one of that corps; but,
unfortunately for us, there were none to spare.

though the somali are rare blackguards in most respects, there are
some traits in their character which have always won me to them. they
love freedom and liberty, and enjoy a jolly row, added to which they
are always in good spirits. in my humble opinion, they would make
first-rate guerilla soldiers for aden, if armed and trained to shoot
with good rifles, and not restrained to wearing any particular
clothes, or confined to steady-marching drills. they have a national
antipathy to the arabs, their elder brothers, and would glory in
having scrimmages with them.

this was the climax of my first proceedings with africa.

stroyan and herne were now both employed at berbera or in its
vicinity. the former had been making slight excursions inland,
shooting, and had killed three elephants; whilst the latter was
purchasing baggage-cattle for the expedition transport. after enjoying
a short repose in civilised life, i again felt restless, and proposed
a move to proceed thither in order to assist herne in completing the
desired complement of animals. this at once met the views of our
commandant, who, doubting whether berbera could supply a sufficient
number of beasts of burden of itself, asked me to cross over the gulf
and see what i could do at kurrum, to keep in communication with
herne, and as soon as i had got enough, to march with them along the
sea-shore to berbera.

nothing could have suited me better. i saw before me, by this measure,
active employment until the breaking-up of the berbera fair.

a kind friend (lieutenant dansey of the bombay army, late assistant
political agent of aden, who knew the characters of all the somali
well) offered to procure me a man as guide and interpreter who had
formerly performed, during the time of his appointment, some political
service in the somali country, with great credit both to his mission
and himself. in consequence of this he was nicknamed el balyuz, or the
ambassador.

balyuz was a clever hindostani scholar, and, as i ultimately found,
possessed such honesty of purpose and straightforwardness of
character, as rendered him a perfect _rara avis_ amongst all somali.
he was of the mijjertaine tribe. travelling in his company, after my
experiences with sumunter and ahmed, was verily a luxury. i parted
with him at the termination of the expedition with pure feelings of
affection.

lieutenant burton now conceived the idea of suppressing the system of
abbanship, thinking that, as the somali had access to aden without any
impost, englishmen ought to enjoy a corresponding freedom to travel in
somali land. this perhaps was scarcely the right time to dictate a
policy which would be distasteful as well as injurious (in a monetary
sense) to the people among whom we were about to travel, and with whom
it was highly essential to our interest to be on the most friendly
terms.[26]

i now applied to the government for some somali policemen, but
unfortunately there were then too few hands present to carry on the
duties of the office, and i could not have them. i therefore engaged,
by the orders of lieutenant burton, a dozen men of various races
(egyptians, nubians, arabs, and seedis), to form an escort, and armed
them with my sabres and muskets. they were all raw recruits, and
unaccustomed to warfare. still we could get no others. with a little
practice they learned to shoot at a mark with tolerable accuracy.

seven of these men, together with the eight camels i brought across
from bunder gori, were despatched direct to berbera, whilst the
remaining five, and some ponies i purchased in aden, remained with me.
i then took a bag of dollars for purchasing camels; some dates and
rice for the consumption of the party; and with the balyuz and the old
servants, imam the butler and farhan the gamekeeper, all was ready for
my second adventure on the 20th march 1855.





                           chapter v.

aden--departure--kurrum--a conclave of sages--arangement of the
expedition--the south-west monsoon--medical practice--the camp
besieged--wounded and captive--a triumphal procession--flight--return
to aden and to england--projects.



21st march 1855.--having engaged a buggalow and stowed away all the
traps, i embarked in the evening, weighed anchor, and set sail. even
before we could sail out of the harbour, the first row commenced. the
nakhoda (captain), as is often the case in these primitive countries,
kept no regular sailors, but trusted to finding men desirous of going
to their country, who would work his vessel for him--all somali being
by nature sailors.

the men he had now on board were of the habr gerhajis and habr teljala
tribes, who occupy the coast-line near kurrum, and had waited the
opportunity of obtaining a passage over there in company with me. they
were all dreadfully uproarious, and would not by any persuasion on my
part keep quiet. on inquiring from the balyuz the cause of their
violent discussions, he informed me they were drawing lots to see who
should be my abban, and those of the seven foreign servants i had with
me. the bare idea of eight abbans was too ridiculous, and their
persistency made it beyond a joke. i instantly ordered the sails to be
hauled down, and had my instructions from lieutenant burton about
abbans proclaimed to the whole crew: that the balyuz was my ras
cafila, and the other foreigners my protectors. the somali were
evidently determined not to be done. if i had been allowed to have but
one abban with me, this could not have occurred. as it was, i said if
they determined on wrangling any more, i should 'bout ship and settle
the difference with them in a less ceremonious manner in the harbour.
this effectually stopped their tongues, and we again proceeded on the
journey. after two entire days' sailing across the gulf with variable
and gentle breezes, we arrived at our destination, kurrum, in safety,
on the third evening, the 24th march, and at once sent some government
letters to the akils, ordering their attendance, and to proclaim
publicly the nature of my business, in order that camels might be
brought for sale. i found all the people extremely obliging; they
tried to make my residence as comfortable as they could; showed me
great deference because i was an englishman, and brought their camels
readily, though, of course, as might be expected, they were canny in
their mode of dealing, trying to dispose of their worst animals first,
and asking prices much above the market tariff. for poor animals they
asked from four to five and a half dollars, which, though not a third
of the price i paid in the warsingali country, was full price for the
finest animals at berbera. berbera during the fair time is undoubtedly
the cheapest place to purchase camels in of all the coast-line, and
the farther you leave it the more expensive animals become, increasing
in price at the same ratio as the extent of distance. whilst halting
here i heard of the existence of the victoria n'yanza. the somali
described its dimensions as equal in extent to the gulf of aden, and
further alluded to its being navigated by white men. none of the men
present had been there to see it, though it was currently known as a
positive fact amongst them. i did not believe the story in the light
they expressed it, supposing they confounded an inland sea with the
western or atlantic ocean. colonel rigby, h.b.m. consul at zanzibar,
tells me he also heard of this lake when he was travelling in this
country some years previously. it is strange this story was never
published earlier. the white navigators alluded to are evidently the
expeditionists who were sent by mehemet ali, viceroy of egypt, up the
white nile as far as gondokoro, about twelve or fourteen years ago,
and the nile and lake have been confounded as one water in the
transmission of the intelligence, though both were seen.

the minds of the kurrum people seemed greatly discomposed about
various rumours which they heard. one was that the english intended to
suppress the slave-trade, and they wished me to tell them if such was
not a fact--saying it would be unjust for us to do so, as slaving was
an acknowledged right given them in the koran, and handed down by
their russool mahamed.

the other bugbear which alarmed them was a report that the english
intended either to take possession of berbera, or that they would give
it to shermarky--a native chief and ally of ours who lives at zeylah.
in short, these numerous fears arose from herne's long residence at
berbera. it looked suspicious seeing him take notes there of
everything, and they naturally put the worst interpretation on all his
actions. what could be the use of his watching the trade, if our
government did not want to take the country?--of watching the
slave-trade, if it did not mean stopping it? and then the suppression
of abbanships was the crowning of all.

the village of kurrum consisted of a single fort and a large
collection of mat huts, all grouped together, situated close to the
shore. the maritime plain consisted of sandy-brown soil, very
uninteresting, with scarcely any vegetation growing on it, and was
here only about half a mile broad. the hills in the background were
very insignificant, not half so high as any i had seen, and were dull
and brown, like those one sees when travelling down the red sea. the
people say that in their recesses and ravines acacias and other
gum-trees grow as they do elsewhere. gum only exudes in the dry hot
season; and the confined air in the ravines is described as being so
hot that people can hardly stay there, and many of the gum-pickers who
do, become deaf in consequence of it.

the water which the villagers used was so brackish as to be hardly
drinkable. i lived here five days, enjoying sour camel's milk,
gossiping with the natives, and roaming about the place. the
difference between the life i was now living, attributable principally
to the sagacity and good-heartedness of the balyuz, was a charming
contrast to my wretched existence when with the warsingali. i bought
twenty-five camels, at an average rate of five and a half dollars
a-head, and then stopped purchasing, as i heard by letter from herne
he had then got nearly sufficient for our requirements--that camels
were very plentiful at berbera, and he was buying them at a cheaper
rate than i could.

on the 29th march, at 4 p.m., i broke ground with all my camels and
ponies, and commenced the march on berbera. at sundown, after
travelling three miles along the sea-shore, we encamped in a
water-course called goldera. the water we found here, in a little well
in its bed, was deliciously sweet--so pleasant after the brackish
kurrum wells. no one who had not been deprived for a long time of the
pure element, can conceive the greed with which a man first plunges
his head into clear sweet water. it is the natural fluid for man, and
for no other beverage does abstinence produce so keen an appetite.

the following morning, a little after daybreak, the caravan was ready,
and we soon got under way. travelling with tedious slowness,
aggravated by the dreary monotony of the road and the sandy plain,
constantly crossing dry, shallow watercourses, lined on both sides by
fringes of stunted acacias or other salsolacious plants, we at last
arrived at a hot spring of sweet water, called golamiro, and rested
here for several hours during the great heat of the mid-day sun. when
the day became cooler we resumed the march, and travelled until after
dark to a grazing-ground one mile short of ain tarad, and there spent
the night. the farther we travelled westwards, the broader became the
maritime plain, and the richer its clothing of shrubs and grass.
besides the ordinary acacias, which were finer and more numerous,
there were many patches of the bastard cypress and tall rank grasses
growing on sandy hillocks, in the same way as they do in india. the
somali exultingly pointed this out as a paradise, replete with every
necessary for life's enjoyment, and begged to know if the english had
any country pastures like it, where camels and sheep can roam about
the whole year round without exhausting it.

31st.--to-day we made a short march, passing through ain tarad, and
encamping on a grazing-ground one mile to its westward. the village,
as usual, was close to the shore, for the convenience of shipping. it
is not half the size of kurrum, but boasts of a fort of recent
construction, with six rusty pieces of cannon lying on the sand in
front of it. an akil, named abdie, being chief of the place, is the
lordly proprietor of these instruments of defence.

on first entering the place he advanced to receive me, and politely
said, "had you not dropped so suddenly in upon me this morning, it was
my intention to have welcomed you with a royal salute, for the honour
you have done, as the representative of the english, in paying me this
visit." this speech, though showing what his feelings were towards me,
was obviously a matter of simple palaver; for, in the first place, the
guns could not have possibly been fired without occasioning their
total destruction; and it was doubtful if he possessed any powder.
whilst sitting in his village, and drinking a bowl of sour curd--the
first thing always offered to a visitor--i observed a group of old men
sitting, in hot discussion on some knotty point, under the lee of the
fort, and desired the balyuz to ascertain the purport of the arguments
under debate, as by their gesticulations i could plainly see it had
some connection with my coming here.

after joining them and listening some time, he returned to say they
were discussing the possibility of our expedition ever reaching the
webbe (river) shebeli; to go as far as ugahden, they thought, was out
of the question. hearing this, i went up to them, and asked what
reasons they had for thinking so. they replied openly that the somali
would stop us before we got half-way. the balyuz then interposed,
saying, "but the british are strong, and can do anything, they like."
hearing this, they laughingly replied, "if the somali came down to
fight, and then ran away back into the fastnesses of their hills, what
would the english do then, who cannot live a day without drinking beer
and eating meat? whereas the somali can do very well without anything,
seldom requiring even water, and not more than one morsel of meat, for
a whole week together." i concluded the argument by saying, "without
any exertion on our parts, we could cripple you at once; we have the
seaboard in our hands, and at any moment could stop your trade, so
that neither grain nor clothing would ever be supplied you; besides,
if we wished, we could take quiet occupation of your hills and
watering-places, and then what would become of you?" the sages mildly
shook their heads, and said the english were indeed shaitans (devils),
and that they had never looked at their position in that light before.
i then repaired to the camp, and found the cattle, as usual, gone out
to graze, under charge of their drivers and two soldiers. in the
evening, when the animals were brought home to be picketed, one pony
and one camel were found wanting.

i sent men immediately to track the missing ones down, when it was
discovered by footprints that some savages had singled them out from
the herd, had driven them gently into a deep ravine, and when there
out of sight had hurried them off to the hills lying beyond the plain.
this open plunder on the coast, where british authority seemed to
prevail, was monstrous. i summoned abdie, as chief of the place, told
him the whole story, and demanded that he should produce the missing
animals immediately, as it was impossible for him not to be cognisant
of the transaction. he said he did not then know who had stolen them,
but i might rest satisfied he would find out by the morning, and they
should be returned intact. he assured me he was lord of all he
surveyed, and his power was infinite within the limits of his clan.
the same night he brought back the pony, and said he would produce the
camel in the morning. i believed he had played this trick himself to
show the effect of his power, and so did the balyuz; but he said he
had been obliged to pay ten dollars to the thief before he would give
it up. i now demanded he would produce the thief for trial, suspecting
that thief to be himself, but he said he could not. this reply made
the balyuz knowingly cock his eye. the next day, as the camel did not
come by noon, i wrote a letter to aden reporting the circumstance, and
begging some retribution would be taken from the akil, as it was
obvious to any man who knows these savages, that abdie could not have
been ignorant of one single feature in the whole of these
transactions. though the loss was small, i did not think it of little
importance, as it remained a precedent, if overlooked, for the
committal of greater deeds; and the place, being a port, was open to
the exaction by blockade of any fines--which, without doubt, is the
true way to make somali feel.

during that day and the succeeding one we travelled along the coast to
siyareh, a small dilapidated fort,[27] standing alone without any
other habitation, as if only intended for a traveller's lodge. near it
was an old well, said to be of antique construction, sunk by the
former occupants of the land. as we increased our distance westwards,
the maritime plain also enlarged, and was bounded to the southwards by
small irregularly-disposed hills, all brown and dreary-looking as
before. to judge from the quantity of vegetation, it would appear that
water is nearer the surface here than elsewhere, though there was none
of any importance to be seen. these few marches, slight as they were,
served to prove the stamina of the soldiers, and showed the seedis to
have twice the heart and bottom of the egyptians, who succumbed at
once to the influences of the sun and fatigue of marching.

3d april.--the caravan broke ground at 2 a.m., and, after travelling
over much the same ground as yesterday, nearly the whole day long
without passing a single habitation, arrived in the evening at
berbera. here i was warmly met by my companions, herne and stroyan,
and began again a social life of great enjoyment. berbera was in the
plenitude of its prosperity. its market was full of life and bustle,
and the harbour was full of native oriental craft. our camp was
pitched on a little rise in the land, facing the east and overlooking
the fair. our tents, three in number, were formed in line--stroyan's
on the right, herne's in the centre, and mine on the left flank
nearest the sea, and each about a dozen yards apart. herne had
procured his fair share of animals, and we mustered from forty to
fifty camels and six or seven ponies and mules, including those i
brought. these at night-time were all tethered in front of our tents,
and guarded by a sentry. during the day they were always sent out to
graze under an escort of soldiers, with somali archers to look after
them. the boxes, pack-saddles, and grain were placed between the
central tent and mine, whilst the dates and more precious cloths i
kept underneath my tent. including ourselves, servants, guards, and
camel-tenders, we mustered in all about forty souls; amongst these
were the two abbans of herne and stroyan, who, now matters had gone so
far, could not prudently be dispensed with; but my man, the balyuz,
was considered chief, or ras cafila.

during the four days succeeding my arrival i inspected the fair and
shipping. the marketplace was supposed to contain upwards of 60,000
people,[28] banyans from cutch and aden, arab merchants and somali,
who had been gradually flocking in from about the 15th november; and
as they arrived they erected mat huts as booths for carrying on their
bartering trade. according to herne's investigations, the somali took
coarse cloths, such as american and english sheeting, black and
indigo-dyed stuffs, and cotton nets (worn by married women generally
to encase their hair), small bars of iron and steel, as well as zinc
and lead, beads of various sorts, and dates and rice. in exchange for
these, they exported slaves, cattle, gums of all sorts, ghee, ivory,
ostrich-feathers, and rhinoceros-horns.

7th.--at sunrise this morning a very interesting scene took place in
the arrival of the great annual harar caravan,--a large body, composed
of an aggregate of numerous small caravans, which all march together
that their combined strength may give mutual support. down the whole
breadth of the plain, like a busy stream of ants, they came in single
file, one camel's nose tied to his leader's tail. immediately on their
flanks were somali, armed with spear and bow, the men who tended them
and looked after the loading. outside them again were occasional
detachments of men riding ponies, all armed, and guarding the caravan
from sudden surprise or attack. in this caravan alone there were about
three thousand people, as many head of cattle, and 500 or more slaves,
all driven chained together for sale in the market. a little later the
same morning a second excitement enlivened our little camp in the
approach of a man-of-war, which came sailing up the coast in full
sail, looking like a giant swan in contrast to the little ducks of
native shipping. it was the hon. east india company's schooner mahi,
commanded by lieutenant king, conveying our captain, lieutenant
burton, and the complement of the expedition. arrived in the harbour,
we saluted them with our small-arms, and went on board to pay respects
and exchange congratulations. king then gave us a hospitable
entertainment, and we all repaired on shore.

the same evening a thundering salute from the mahi was fired, to
assure the somali we were travelling under the auspices of the british
government, and king departed with his vessel.

lieutenant burton now took occupation of the centre tent with herne,
and the party was complete.

we were then severally appointed to our respective duties, lieutenant
burton commanding; stroyan chief surveyor; herne, photographer,
geologist, and assistant-surveyor; whilst i was to be a
jack-of-all-trades, assisting everybody, looking after the interests
of the men, portioning out their rations, setting the guards, and
collecting specimens of natural history in all its branches. the
central tent was fixed as a place of rendezvous for all to flock to in
case of any sudden alarm. here i appended my guns and sword, whilst my
revolver-pistol and dirk were placed within my belt by day, or under
my pillow by night. i made the whole guard sleep with their arms in
rear of the camp, where it was most likely any attack might be
expected. as so many men were necessarily brought on duty by watching
the cattle grazing in the day-time, i only posted two sentries by
night to watch the camp--one with the guard in the rear, the other
over the cattle in front; whilst we englishmen and the balyuz
occasionally patrolled the camp to see that the sentries were on the
alert.

9th.--on this day the gugi, or south-west somali monsoon, in
opposition to the dairti, or north-east monsoon, commenced in the
hills behind our camp, and warned us that we should soon have to start
southwards. the fair had already begun to break. caravan after caravan
streamed out of the town, wending their way across the plain like
strings of ants emerging from a hole, and, like the busy habits of
those little insects, kept the whole maritime plain alive in motion.
at this time we were daily expecting a vessel from aden, which would
bring us some letters and instruments that were on their way out from
england, and saw the great ugahden caravan preparing to leave, but
were undecided what to do--whether to go with them without our things
from england, or wait and rely upon our strength in travelling alone.
the latter alternative was unfortunately decided upon, and we saw our
wonted protector depart upon its journey.

15th.--saw the shore and harbour, alike both destitute of any living
thing, save a few diseased and dying cattle, and one poor forlorn
girl, in whom the smallpox had begun to show its symptoms, and who was
now mercilessly left by her parents, with only two or three days'
provisions, to die like a dog on the inhospitable plain. having
suffered from that disease myself, and not fearing contagion, i went
to her and administered some medicine, which she took without any
hesitation; and i hoped to cure her, for she was really, barring the
blackness, a very pretty creature, but the disease was beyond my skill
to relieve. i then took her to a room in the tomb of an arab sheikh,
gave her some rice-water, and bade her keep out of the sun, but it was
no use. she took fright at the idea of living with the dead, and
wandered into the desert no one knows whither, and was seen no more.
so completely was berbera cleared out now, that even the matting and
sticks which formed the booths, with two or three exceptions, were
packed on the camels and carried away. we were now alone, and nobody
came near us; our two abbans had begged and obtained permission to go
with their families to their homes in the hills close by, in company
with the retiring caravans, leaving their sons for the time being, as
substitutes, until we marched past their abodes.

in this isolated position we felt no alarm for our safety, as long at
least as we remained upon the sea-shore, deeming the somali would
never be so imprudent as to attack us in such a vital place to them as
berbera, where their whole interests of life were centred, and where,
by the simple process of blockading, we could so easily take
retribution in any way we liked.

so confident were we in this assumption, that we did not take the
precaution of standing sentry ourselves at night, thinking it more
prudent to nurse our strength whilst here, to be better able to hold
out when it would become necessary after our leaving the sea-shore.

though somali are cunning as foxes, they are not wise.

on the 18th april, by a providential coincidence, a small arab vessel
came into the deserted harbour to see if anything still remained of
the fair. in her there were several men and four women, somali,
desirous of going to their homes. finding we were the only people
left, and not daring to travel in that country alone, they petitioned
us to take them with us. it was hard to refuse these poor creatures;
but fearing our supply of dates and rice would not hold out with so
many additional mouths to eat it, we reluctantly refused the men. the
four women, however, on their engaging to do the minor offices of the
camp, to bring water, and lead the camels, were permitted to remain
with us. that evening we invited the captain and his crew to dine in
the camp; and it was fortunate that we did so, as the sequel will
show. shortly after sundown, as we were all sitting in our usual way,
on an extempore divan in front of the tents, drinking coffee, telling
stories, and enjoying the cool sea evening breezes, a challenge was
heard by the sentinel placed on the rear right of the camp, followed
by a sudden and rapid discharge of musketry, which took us by
surprise. i had previously given strict orders that no ammunition was
to be wasted in firing to frighten, or giving false alarms; therefore,
hearing this, i instantly ran to the spot to see what was the matter,
and found three men walking quietly into camp, leading ponies by their
reins, whilst the guard, to intimidate them, were firing bullets in
the air immediately over their heads. my anger knew no bounds. all
hopes of security seemed annihilated by such direct disobedience to
all order, and persistence in such a false principle as trying to
frighten, which all black men, by a sort of natural instinct,
invariably endeavour to do. i then assembled the men, and in presence
of the intruders again proclaimed through the balyuz my intention to
punish with severity any person who might create a false alarm or fire
a bullet vacantly in the air; directing that, in case of any
opposition to a challenge, they should fire into, and not over, their
object.

i then sent the balyuz and the three newly-arrived men round to the
front of the camp, where lieutenant burton and the other two officers
were sitting, to be interrogated as to the purpose of their visit. we
all at first naturally suspected them of being spies sent to inspect
our dispositions and resources; but after a long palaver with
lieutenant burton, he concluded that their coming there was
accidental, and not designed. true to their nature as easterns, who
from constant practice can forge lies with far greater facility to
themselves than they can speak simple truths, bringing in with the
readiest aptitude the application of immediate circumstances to
harmonise appropriately in the development of their tale, these men at
once made use of the circumstance of the arrival of the vessel that
evening, saying they merely came down to ascertain if the ship was not
full of building material, as it was currently reported amongst their
clan, the habr owel, that their old enemy, shermarkey, the chief of
zeylah, was lying with other vessels in the port of siyareh, waiting
an opportunity to land at berbera and take occupation of the place by
building forts, as he had done on previous occasions. this story
seemed the more probable from the fact that everybody knew shermarkey
wished to have the place, and that he would at any time have taken it,
had it lain within his power to do so.

the more to impose on our credulity, they further asked, with an air
of indignation, "how could you suspect us of any treacherous
intentions towards you, when you know us to be men of the same tribe
as your abbans?" the palaver over, these wolves in sheep's clothing
were allowed to sup on dates with our men, and depart at their
pleasure.

at the usual hour we all turned in to sleep, and silence reigned
throughout the camp. a little after midnight, probably at one or two
a.m., there suddenly arose a furious noise, as though the world were
coming to end: there was a terrible rush and hurry, then came sticks
and stones, flying as thick as hail, followed by a rapid discharge of
firearms, and my tent shook as if it would come down. i bounced out of
bed, with pistol and dirk in hand, and ran across to the central tent
to know what was the matter, and if we were to have any shooting.
lieutenant burton, who was occupied in trying to load his revolver,
replied there was:[29] "be sharp, and arm to defend the camp." this i
immediately did, stepping out in front of his tent; but though i saw
many dusky forms before me, it was too dark to discern whether they
were friend or foe.

whilst standing, in hesitation how to act, stones kept whizzing over
and around me, and i received a blow with one in the inside of my
knee, which nearly knocked my leg from under me; it came from the
left, where i had not been looking. i then ran under lee of the fly of
the tent to take a better survey, and, by stooping low, could perceive
the heads of some men peeping like monkeys over the boxes. lieutenant
burton now said, "don't step back, or they will think we are
retiring." chagrined by this rebuke at my management in fighting, and
imagining by the remark i was expected to defend the camp, i stepped
boldly to the front, and fired at close quarters into the first man
before me. he was stooping to get a sight of my figure in relief
against the sky; he fell back at the discharge, and i saw no more of
him. proceeding on, i saw some more men also stooping; i fired into
the foremost, and he likewise fell back, but i do not know that i hit
him. i then fired into a third man at close quarters, who also
receded, possibly uninjured, though i cannot say. i was now close to
the brink of the rising-ground, entirely surrounded by men, when i
placed the muzzle of the dean & adams against the breast of the
largest man before me, and pulled the trigger, but pulled in vain; the
cylinder would not rotate; i imagine a cap had got jammed by the
trigger-guard. in a fit of desperation, i was raising the revolver to
hit the man in the face with it, when i suddenly found my legs
powerless to support me, and i was falling, grasping for support, and
gasping for breath, i did not then know why, though afterwards i
discovered it was caused by the shock of a heavy blow on the lungs.

in another instant i was on the ground with a dozen somali on the top
of me. the man i had endeavoured to shoot wrenched the pistol out of
my hand, and the way the scoundrel handled me sent a creeping shudder
all over me. i felt as if my hair stood on end; and, not knowing who
my opponents were, i feared that they belonged to a tribe called eesa,
who are notorious, not only for their ferocity in fighting, but for
the unmanly mutilations they delight in. indescribable was my relief
when i found that my most dreadful fears were without foundation. the
men were in reality feeling whether, after an arab fashion, i was
carrying a dagger between my legs, to rip up a foe after his victim
was supposed to be powerless. finding me naked, all but a few rags,
they tied my hands behind my back, and began speaking to me in arabic.
not knowing a word of that language, i spoke in broken somali, and
heard them say they had not killed any of the english, and would not
kill me.

the man i had last endeavoured to kill was evidently the captain of
the gang; he now made me rise, and, holding the other end of the rope
to which my hands were attached, led me round to the rear of the camp,
taking great precaution not to bring me in contact with many men at
once, fearing lest they might take the law into their own hands, and
despatch me against his will and authority. arrived on the interior or
rear side of the camp, men kept flocking round me, and showed a hasty
anxiety to stab their spears into me; all, doubtless, were anxious for
the honour of drawing the white man's blood, but none, in my captor's
presence, dared do it.

i was now becoming very weak and faint, and almost unable to breathe;
for the fact was, when i was knocked down, it was done with such
violence by a shillelah on the lung breast, my whole frame was stunned
by it, so that i could not feel; but now a swelling had set in, which,
with the tightness of the skin drawn over the chest, by my hands being
tied behind, nearly prevented respiration. i begged my captor to untie
my hands and fasten them in front. he obligingly did so. i then asked
for a little water and something to lie down upon; they were both
supplied. feeling myself somewhat revived, i began a rambling
conversation with my captor, who sat by my side still holding the
string, when several other men came and joined in the talk. they began
a mocking tirade in their own language, of which i understood but
little and could answer less; when an aden donkey-boy (judging from
his appearance) came with a jeering, sarcastic sneer, and asked me, in
hindustani, what business i had in their country, and where i had
intended going, adding, were i a good mohammedan like themselves, they
would not touch me, but being a christian i should be killed. this
ridiculous farce excited my risible faculties, and provoked a laugh,
when i replied, our intentions were simply travelling; we wished to
see the country of ugahden, and pass on to zanzibar. i was a
christian, and invited them, if it must be so, to despatch their work
at once. on the donkey-boy's communicating this to the bystanders,
they all broke into a rude boisterous laugh, spun upon their heels,
and went off to open out the property. nothing as yet had been taken
away. several wounded men were now brought and placed in a line before
me; they groaned, and rolled, and stretched their limbs, as though
they were in agonies of pain, and incessantly called for water, which
was readily supplied them. in the rear i heard the sound of murmuring
voices, the breaking of boxes, and ripping of bales of cloth, as
though a band of robbers were stealthily dividing their
unlawfully-gotten spoils in silence and fear of detection.

just then the day began to dawn, and the light increased sufficiently
to disclose what had been done. the tents were down, the property was
lying in order on the ground, the camels and ponies were still
picketed in their places, and all the robbers were standing looking
on. at this juncture my captor and protector gave his end of my string
over to the care of another man of very mean aspect, ordering him to
look after me, and see that nobody came to injure me, whilst he
retired in the direction of the property, and, selecting two fine
stalwart men of equal proportions with himself, came again in front of
me; then linking arms, and sloping spears over their shoulders, they
commenced a slow martial march, keeping time by singing a solemn
well-regulated tune, in deep, full, stentorian voices, until they
completed the full circuit of the camp, and arrived again in front of
me. this, i imagine, was their "conquering hero comes," the song of
victory. it was well sung, and had a very imposing effect, greatly
increased by the dead silence which reigned in every other quarter. i
felt quite sorry when this act was over, and would willingly have had
it encored. from the orderly manner and regularity with which
everything was done, i judge this to be a fair sample of the manner in
which all plundering parties are conducted. the song and march were no
sooner at an end than the whole ground became a scene of busy, active
life. every man, save the one who was holding my string, rushed in a
regular scramble upon the property, and, like a legion of devils,
began tearing and pulling at everything in promiscuous confusion, to
see who could carry most away. some darted at the camels and began
pulling them along, others seized the ponies and began decamping;
others, again, caught up the cloths, or dates, or rice, or anything
they could lay hands on, and endeavoured to carry them off. but this
was not so easy; there were too many men to be all satisfied, and
those who had least began wrangling with their more fortunate
competitors, who, on their part, not wishing to relinquish anything
they had obtained, forcibly contested for their rights.

a more complete and ferocious _melee_ i never witnessed. the whole
ground was a scene of pull devil, pull baker, and victory to the
stronger. as one man, hurrying along, was trailing his cloth behind,
another rushed at it and pulled him back; clubs were unsparingly used,
and destruction threatened with spears; what would not easily succumb
to pulling, was separated with stabs of the spears or cuts of their
knives. the camels and ponies were not more easily disposed of; by
snatching from one hand and snatching from another, they were
constantly in different people's hands. it was a scene very like that
of an indian poultry-yard, when some entrails are thrown amongst the
chickens, and every fowl tries to rob the other.

whilst all were intent with deep earnestness in this scramble, an
alarm was suddenly given that another party were coming down the hills
to fight and rob them of their spoils. the disordered band were
instantly panic-stricken; for a moment or two there was the deadest
silence; and then everybody, save some forty or fifty men who were
probably more experienced hands, burst across the plain, flying in
long jumps, and hurrying with all their might towards the hills. i
heard afterwards it was not an unusual practice in this land of
robbers for one party to get up an attack upon a caravan, and then
another one, getting wind of their design, to project a plan of
despoiling them as soon as they shall be in such a disconcerted
_melee_ that they would not be able to act in concert to support one
another.

whilst they were away, three fine-looking men came, with some of our
soldiers' sabres; and one, standing over me, threatened, with
ferocious determination in his countenance, to cut me in two. twice he
lifted his sword above his head, and brought it down with violence to
within an inch or two of my side, and each time withdrew it, as if
suddenly repenting of his purpose. i stared him earnestly in the face,
but neither flinched nor uttered any noise. they then left me, and
went to join the other forty thieves. i conceive this demonstration
was made with a view of testing my pluck, and had i cried or implored
for mercy, i should inevitably have been killed upon the spot. the
last and worst scene in this tragedy was now to be performed.

my jailer, who was still holding the string, stepped up close to me,
and coolly stabbed me with his spear. i then raised my body a little
in defence, when he knocked me down by jobbing his spear violently on
my shoulder, almost cutting the jugular arteries. i rose again as he
poised his spear, and caught the next prod, which was intended for my
heart, on the back of one of my shackled hands; this gouged the flesh
up to the bone. the cruel villain now stepped back a pace or two, to
get me off my guard, and dashed his spear down to the bone of my left
thigh. i seized it violently with both my hands, and would not
relinquish the gripe until he drew a shillelah from his girdle, and
gave me such a violent blow on my left arm, i thought the bone was
broken, and the spear fell helplessly from my hands. finding his spear
too blunt for running me through by a simple job when standing still,
he now dropped the rope-end, walked back a dozen paces, and, rushing
on me with savage fury, plunged his spear through the thick part of my
right thigh into the ground, passing it between the thigh-bone and
large sinew below.

with the action of lightning, seeing that death was inevitable if i
remained lying there a moment longer, i sprang upon my legs, and gave
the miscreant such a sharp back-hander in the face with my
double-bound fists that he lost his presence of mind, and gave me a
moment's opportunity to run away; which, by the lord, i lost no time
in doing, taking very good care, by holding my hands on one side, not
to allow the dangling rope to trip me up. i was almost naked, and
quite bare upon the feet, but i ran over the shingly beach towards the
sea like wildfire. the man followed me a little way, but, finding i
had the foot of him, threw his spear like a javelin, but did not
strike me, for i bobbed, and allowed it to pass safely over my head;
he then gave up the chase. still i had at least forty more men to pass
through, who were scattered all about the place, looking for what
property they could pick up, before i could get safe away. these men,
seeing the chase, all tried to cut off my retreat.

however, i dodged them all by turns, running fast across them, and
bobbing as they threw their spears after me, until i reached the
shore, when i had the satisfaction of seeing the last man give up the
pursuit and leave me to myself. i was now fast fainting from loss of
blood, and sat gently on a mound of sand, picked the knots which bound
my hands open with my teeth, and exposed my breast to the genial
influences of the refreshing sea-breeze, which at sunrise, as this
was, is indescribably pleasant. but what a gloomy prospect was now
before me!! i was growing weaker every minute; my limbs were beginning
to stiffen and the muscles to contract, and i thought there was no
help probably nearer than ain tarad; what was to be done? i could not
travel the distance, and i must perish miserably by slow degrees, from
starvation and exhaustion, in the dreary desert; far better, thought
i, had the spear done its worst, and no lingering would have followed.
whilst reflecting in this strain, my eyes, wistfully gazing on the few
remaining huts of berbera, lit upon some female figures beckoning to
me, but i could not divine who they were, or what was their meaning.

i rose as a last hope, and hobbled towards them, for my right leg was
nearly crooked up double, and was so weak it could not support the
weight of my body but for an instant at a time. drawing nearer, i
discovered them to be the four women whom we the evening before
permitted to join our camp. just then i saw some men hurrying from the
eastward along the shore, endeavouring to meet me.

these, i soon perceived, were the old balyuz and several of our
servants. as soon as they arrived, they told me all that had happened.
immediately on the outbreak, the soldiers fired their guns, and all
but one or two at once departed. stroyan, he supposed, was killed at
the outset; lieutenants burton and herne had run away with him
immediately after i left the central tent to fight. the former had
been speared in the face, the latter had been much bruised with
war-clubs, and some of our men had received severe sword-cuts. after
escaping from the fight, herne took refuge in the empty huts of
berbera, and at daybreak sent a servant to detain the ain tarad
vessel, which had so providentially come in the previous evening. my
companions were then on board of her, and had sent the balyuz with the
men to search for me, and pick up anything they could find.

i was now carried to the vessel, and stretched upon the poop in
safety, and felt more truly thankful for this miraculous escape than
words can tell. it is only after a deliverance of this kind one fully
values or can properly appreciate the gift of life. my companions
seemed downcast and full of sorrow for the sad misfortune which had so
disastrously terminated our long-cherished hopes, and had deprived us
so prematurely of an old and valued friend, especially dear to me, as
he was a thorough sportsman. for courage, daring, and enterprise, as
well as good-fellowship, there never lived a man more worthy of esteem
than poor stroyan.

lieutenant burton had sent a boat's crew off to near the site of our
camp, a distance of three miles, to fetch away anything that might
remain there, and bring it to us. they found the place deserted, with
only such things left as the somali could make no use of, and were too
cumbersome to carry away; such, for instance, as grain, boxes, books,
and various scientific instruments, which, after being wantonly
injured, were left scattered on the ground. it appeared, by accounts
brought back, that many of the men who ran off at the first false
alarm never ventured back again to help themselves from the spoils.
they had now destroyed about l1500 worth of property, but had enriched
themselves but very little, for, whilst fighting, they had destroyed
in the scramble nearly everything of any worth to themselves. when the
boat's crew returned with stroyan's body, it was found to be too late
to sail that evening.

during the time of waiting, a poor man, with no covering on his body,
crawled up to the vessel, and implored the captain, in the name of
allah--the fakir's mode of begging--to give him a passage to aden. his
prayer was answered, and he came on board. he was a mussulman, born in
cashmere, and had been wandering about the world in the capacity of a
fakir; but was now, through hunger and starvation, reduced to a mere
skeleton of skin and bones. his stomach was so completely doubled
inwards, it was surprising the vital spark remained within him. on
being asked to recite his history, he said, "i was born in the 'happy
valley' of cashmere; but reduced circumstances led me to leave my
native land. when wandering alone in some woods one day, i had a
visitation, which induced me to turn devotee, and wander about the
world to visit all places of pilgrimage, carrying only a bottle and a
bag, and ask charity in the name of god, who supplies the world with
everything, and takes compassion on the destitute. at first i
travelled in india, visiting its shrines and temples, and then
determined on crossing the sea to see what other countries were like.
taking passage at bombay, i first went to muskat in southern arabia,
and thence travelled overland to aden, begging all the way, and
receiving kind hospitality wherever i spent the night. in aden i
remained a while, and by constant begging accumulated sufficient
property to purchase food for a considerable time, when i again set
out, in the name of allah, to see what the somali land was like. at
first i went across to kurrum, and lived there as long as my little
stock held out, but i could get no assistance from the people of the
place. the stock exhausted, i was spurned from every door. at last,
despairing of obtaining anything on the coast, i ventured to see what
the interior would produce, but i found the somali everywhere the
same; they were mere hywans (animals), with whom no human beings could
live. a man might travel in arabia or any other place in the world,
but in the somali land no one could exist. finding myself reduced to
the last stages of life, for no one would give me food, i went to a
pool of water in a ravine amongst the hills, and for the last
fortnight have been living there on water and the gums of trees.
seeing i was about to die, as a forlorn hope i ventured in this
direction, without knowing whither i was going, or where i should come
to; but god, you see, has brought me safely out."

20th.--this morning we weighed anchor, and in two days more arrived in
aden.

thus then ended my first expedition,--a signal failure from
inexperience, and with a loss of l510 worth of my own private
property, which i never recovered. i had nothing to show but eleven
artificial holes in my body. had we gone straight from aden, without
any nervous preliminary fuss, and joined the ugahden caravan at
berbera just as it was starting, i feel convinced we should have
succeeded; for that is the only way, without great force, or giving
yourself up to the protection of a powerful chief, that any one could
travel in somali land. firearms are useful in the day, but the somali
despise them at night, and consequently always take advantage of
darkness to attack. small-shot and smooth-bore guns, on this account,
would be of far greater advantage as a means of defence than rifles
with balls; and nothing but shot well poured in would have saved us
from this last attack. we have been often condemned for not putting on
more sentries to watch; but had the whole camp been in a state of
ordinary preparation for war, with such cowardly hearts as our men all
had, we should have been as signally defeated. we now set sail from
berbera, all highly disgusted with our defeat; and at lieutenant
burton's request, we said we would go with him again if the government
would allow it.

on arriving in aden, i was a miserable-looking cripple, dreadfully
emaciated from loss of blood, and with my arms and legs contracted
into indescribable positions, to say nothing of various angry-looking
wounds all over my body. dansey now gave me a room in his house, and
bestowed such tender care on me as i shall never forget. colonel
coghlan also, full of feeling and sympathy for my misfortune, came
over and sat at the feet of my bed, with tears in his eyes, and tried
to condole with me. fever, however, had excited my brain, so i laughed
it all off as a joke, and succeeded in making him laugh too. the
doctors next took compassion on me, formed into committee, and
prescribed, as the only remedy likely to set me right again, a three
years' leave to england, where, with the congenial effects of my
native home, they hoped i should recover. lieutenant burton now sent
in an estimate of all loss to the government, and advised, as the best
plan of taking an effectual revenge upon the somali, in whose
territories we were attacked (the habr owel), that a ship should be
sent to blockade their coast, with a demand that they should produce
for trial in aden the living bodies of the two men who so cruelly
killed our lamented friend, and so wantonly endeavoured to despatch
me. further, that a sum of money equivalent to all our aggregate
losses should be paid in full ere the blockade would be raised. this
was considered the wisest method by which, in future times, any
recurrence of such disasters might probably be avoided. it is needless
to observe, considering the importance of berbera to the welfare of
the habr owel, their subsistence and their existence as a nation
depending on it, that anything might have been exacted from them that
we wished to extort, or they could afford to give. the government,
unfortunately for our pockets, were of a different opinion; they would
have nothing to do with money exactions when human blood had to be
avenged. moreover, they had been wishing to suppress the slave-trade,
and found in this occurrence a favourable opportunity to indulge their
hobby. they therefore established a blockade of all the coast-line
between siyareh and jibal elmas, demanding, as the only alternative by
which it would be raised, the surrender of the principal instigators
of the outrage on us for trial in aden, of whom the first in
consequence was ou ali, the murderer of stroyan. when the season for
the fair arrived, the only vessel present in the berbera harbour was a
british man-of-war, and the habr owel then believed we were in
earnest. until then, it appeared, they would not believe it, thinking
our trade in aden would suffer by this proceeding as much as their
own. they were, however, mistaken; trade found an outlet at other
places; and they, by its suppression on their grounds, were fast
sinking into insignificance. seeing this, they showed by urgent
prayers a disposition to treat on any conditions we might like to
impose on them, and even sent in for trial to aden a man who showed
the scar of a gun-shot wound on his back, and at the same time
declared their intention of forwarding all others to us as soon as
they could catch them.

to make the matter short, i shall give intact the articles of a treaty
which was signed at berbera on the 7th november 1856, between the
honourable east india company on the one hand, and the habr owel tribe
of somali on the other, as it appears in an appendix (d), in a
'history of arabia felix or yemen,' by captain r. l. playfair,
assistant political resident, aden.[30]

during my residence in aden, which lasted three weeks, or until the
second mail after my arrival took its departure for suez, my wounds
healed up in such a marvellously rapid manner, i was able to walk at
large before i left there. they literally closed as wounds do in an
india-rubber ball after prickings with a penknife. it would be
difficult to account for the rapidity with which my wounds closed,
knowing, as everybody who has lived in aden must do, that that is the
worst place in the world for effecting cures, had i not, in addition
to a strong constitution which i fortunately possess, been living for
many months previously in a very abstemious manner, principally, as
appears in the body of the journal, on dates, rice, and sour curds.

i now left aden on "sick certificate," and arrived in england in the
early part of june 1855. the crimean war was then at its height, and
the military authorities were beating up for recruits in every corner
of the land. this summons for war was irresistible. i was suffering a
little from blindness, brought on probably by my late losses and
impoverishment of blood.[31] still i lost no time in volunteering my
services to take part in this great national object, thinking it was a
duty, as a soldier, i owed my country, and delighting in the prospect
of immediate and active employment, where, at any rate, i should be in
europe and enjoying the temperature i had come home to seek. the
turkish contingent was then being incorporated, and i was, being an
indian officer, competent to serve in it. with an introduction from
friends, i wrote a letter to major graham, an officer appointed by the
horse guards to engage officers for general vivian's contingent,
giving him an account of my past services, and asking for an
appointment with the army. he at once closed with me, declaring "i was
just the sort of man he wanted," and, granting two weeks' leave to
prepare an outfit, told me to be off. in a fortnight more i arrived in
constantinople, and was posted to a regiment of turks, with the
commission of captain. the turkish contingent was now at buyukdere,
but was soon ordered to embark in vessels and proceed to kertch in the
crimea. i went with them, and remained serving until the close of the
crimean war. my commandant, major greene, being otherwise employed, i,
as second in command and kaimakan of the 16th regiment of infantry,
took its headquarters back, and disbanded them at constantinople.

whilst i was engaged in these parts, and thinking there would be no
further chance of my being able to return to africa, i had made up my
mind, at the expiration of the war, to try my hand in collecting the
fauna of the very interesting regions of the caucasian mountains, and
had even gone so far as to purchase guns and equip myself for it.
captain smyth, of the bengal army, an old and notorious himalayan
sportsman, had agreed to accompany me, and we wrote home to the royal
geographical society to exert their influence in obtaining passports,
by which we could cross over the range into the russian frontier; but
this scheme was put a stop to by dr shaw, the secretary of that
society, writing out to say there would be very little hope of our
being able to obtain the passports we required, and that he thought
the time ill-advised for working in those regions, adding, at the same
time, that an expedition to explore africa was again being organised
under the command of captain burton, and advising me to join it. by
the same mail i received a communication from captain burton himself,
inviting me to join him once more in exploring africa, saying there
would be no expense attached to it, as the home and indian governments
had each promised to contribute l1000. this settled the matter.
without a second thought i disposed of my caucasian equipments, and,
taking a passage to england by the first mail, travelled night and day
until i again reached home, deeming, as i did on the first expedition,
that i might just as well nurse my furlough for a future
occasion,--the fact being that i was more of a sportsman and traveller
than a soldier, and i only liked my profession when i had the sport of
fighting.


[illustration: note *********************** gondokoro, german mission
station: cataracts which stopped the expedition* discover the sources
of the nile by * kirira river & bari kingdom heard of* the draba south
of the equator.]




          journal of a cruise on the tanganyika lake.



                           chapter i.

the royal geographical society--the strange lake on the map--set
off--arrive at zanzibar--a preliminary excursion--a sail along the
coast--the pangani river--a jemadar's trick--journey up
country--adventures--return to zanzibar--scenes there--objects of the
expedition--recruiting for followers--the cafila bashi--the
start--fevers--discussions about the mountains of the moon and the
victoria n'yanza--the tanganyika.



on my arrival in england, the first thing i did was to visit captain
burton, and obtain an introduction to the royal geographical society,
under whose auspices i was about to travel. i next visited the
society, and here was revealed to me, for the first time, the great
objects designed for the expedition in question. on the walls of the
society's rooms there hung a large diagram, comprising a section of
eastern africa, extending from the equator to the fourteenth degree of
south latitude, and from zanzibar sixteen degrees inland, which had
been constructed by two reverend gentlemen, messrs erhardt and
rebmann, missionaries of the church mission society of london, a short
time previously, when carrying on their duties at zanzibar. in this
section-map, swallowing up about half of the whole area of the ground
included in it, there figured a lake of such portentous size and such
unseemly shape, representing a gigantic slug, or, perhaps, even closer
still, the ugly salamander, that everybody who looked at it
incredulously laughed and shook his head. it was, indeed, phenomenon
enough in these days to excite anybody's curiosity! a single sheet of
sweet water, upwards of eight hundred miles long by three hundred
broad, quite equal in size to, if not larger than, the great salt
caspian.

now, to the honour of admiral sir george back be it said, a fellow of
the royal geographical society, and an old explorer himself in the
arctic regions, that he had determined in his mind that this great
mystery should be solved, and that an insight should be gained into
those interesting regions, concerning which conjectures and
speculations had been rife, and which had caused so many hot debates
for so many ages past amongst all the first geographers of the day;
debates which, hitherto, nobody had been found energetic enough to set
at rest by actual inspection of the country.

casting about for a man fitted to carry out his plans, the admiral hit
upon captain burton, who had recently returned from constantinople,
where he had been engaged with the bashi-bazuks; and it was thus,
through sir george's influence in the royal geographical society, that
captain burton had now been appointed to the command of this
expedition.

a difference now arose about the government l2000 in aid of the
expedition. the foreign office had paid their l1000, but the india
house thought captain burton's pay ought to be considered their share.
finding this was the case i objected to go, as i did not wish, for one
reason, to put myself under any money obligations to captain burton;
and, for another reason, i thought i had paid enough for a public
cause in the somali country, without having gained any advantage to
myself. captain burton, however, knew nothing of astronomical
surveying, of physical geography, or of collecting specimens of
natural history, so he pressed me again to go with him, and even
induced the president of the royal geographical society to say there
need be no fear of money if we only succeeded. i then consented to go,
determining in my own mind, somehow or other, to have my old plans,
formed in india, of completing my museum, carried into effect, even
if, after all, the funds of the expedition did not suffice. captain
burton now gave me a cheque for my passage out of the public
funds;[32] but my incorporation with the expedition was not quite so
easy as had been expected; for the government in india at this time
were using every endeavour in their power to increase their
indo-european forces, and had written home to leadenhall street an
urgent desire that no officers should have their leave extended, or be
placed on duty out of india; and for this reason, the india house
authorities, although privately evincing a strong disposition to
permit my going, felt it necessary to withhold their sanction to it. i
was now between two fires. i had sacrificed my caucasian expedition,
and could not speak with the authorities in india. so, to cut the
matter short, with a kind hint from my friend sir henry rawlinson, as
i had still nearly three years' furlough at my disposal, i ventured
over with captain burton by the overland route to bombay, and tried my
luck again.

this time, fortunately, it turned up trumps; for i need only say that
the governor of bombay at this time was lord elphinstone, a man whose
large and comprehensive mind was not only able to discern the frown of
a pending mutiny looming in the distance, but whose quick foresight,
backed by a great and natural unremitting energy of body, was
subsequently able to forestall and provide, as far as human powers
extend, against its thundering outburst. he saw at a glance of how
much importance to the improvement of the commercial objects of his
presidency this exploring expedition was likely to be. the secretary
to government, mr anderson, who was equally of this view, treated the
matter as a great national object, and, at the request of captain
burton, drew up an official application to incorporate me in the
expedition, and sent it to the government at calcutta, with the
recommendation of his lordship; whilst i, in anticipation of the
sanction of the governor-general, lord canning, was permitted to
accompany captain burton to zanzibar in the hon. east india company's
sloop-of-war elphinstone, commanded by captain frushard, i.n., and
commence operations at once.

this vessel had been detached especially on this duty to meet captain
burton's views, that a political importance should be given to the
mission by our arriving in government official state at the
starting-point, in order to secure the influence and respect of the
sultan reigning there.

after a residence of one week at bombay, during which time i completed
our outfit in scientific instruments and other minor points--for this
charge was reposed in me, owing to my previous experience in those
matters--we set sail on the 3d december 1856, taking two goanese cook
"boys," by name valantine and gaetano, with us as servants, and in
eighteen days landed at our destination, zanzibar. the kindness of
captain frushard, who shared his cabin with us, as well as the
constant attentions of his officers, combined with pleasant weather
and a liberal fare, provided for us by the bombay government in the
capacity of political envoys, made the time occupied on the voyage fly
quickly and very agreeably.[33]

immediately on arrival at the island of zanzibar, we were warmly
received and welcomed by our consul, colonel hamerton, an irish
gentleman, and one characterised by the true merry hospitality of his
race. he had been a great sufferer, by the effects of the climate
operating on him from too long a residence in these enervating
regions; but he was, nevertheless, vivacious in temperament and full
of amusing anecdotes, which kept the whole town alive. he gave us a
share of his house, and what was more, made that house our homes. his
generosity was boundless, and his influence so great, that he
virtually commanded all societies here. our old and faithful ally, the
imaum of muscat, who, unfortunately for us, had but recently died, was
so completely ruled by him, that he listened to and obeyed him as a
child would his father.

the present ruler of zanzibar--that is, of the coastline, with all the
islands which lie between the equator on the southern confines of the
somali country and the portuguese possessions in mozambique--is sultan
majid, the second son of the old imaum; for it must be remembered that
the imaum, at his death, divided his territories, then comprising
muscat in arabia, and zanzibar in africa, into two separate states,
giving the former, or muscat, to his eldest son, sayyid (prince)
suweni, whilst the latter was bequeathed to his favourite, the second
son, sayyid majid, now styled sultan. sultan majid was born of a
circassian woman, and in consequence is very light in complexion; and,
taking much after the inclinations of his father, is likely to become
as great a favourite as was the old imaum. zanzibar island is the seat
of government, and consequently the metropolis. the town contains
about sixty thousand inhabitants of all nations, but principally
coloured people, of which the suahili, or coast people, living on the
opposite main, predominate in number, though they are the least
important. of the merchants, there are several european houses,
comprising french, germans, and americans; and numerous asiatics,
mostly from arabia and hindostan,--the suahili ranking lowest of the
whole. there are also three consuls, an english, french, and american,
who look after the interests of the subjects of their respective
governments.

we found, considering it would take more than a month to organise an
expedition, that we had arrived here at the very worst season of the
year for commencing a long inland journey--the height of the dry
season in these regions, when water is so very scarce in the more
desert tracts of the interior of the continent, that travelling, from
want of that material element, is precarious; and it was just before
the commencement of the vernal monsoon, or greater rainy season, when
everything would be deluged.

considering this, and giving due deference to the opinions of the
travelling merchants of this place against our organising at once for
the interior journey to the great lake, captain burton bethought
himself of gaining a little elementary training in east african
travelling, by spending the remainder of the dry season in inspecting
various places on the coast; and, if a favourable opportunity
presented itself, he felt desirous of having a peep at the snowy
kilimandjaro mountain, of which the rev. mr rebmann, who first
discovered it, had sent home reports, and which had excited such angry
and unseemly contests amongst our usually sedate though speculative
carpet-geographers in england as rendered a further inspection highly
necessary.

now, as the royal geographical society had desired us to place
ourselves in communication with mr rebmann, who was then at his
mission-station, kisuludini, at rabbai, on a high hill at the back of
mombas, and to try and solicit him to go with us into the interior,
where it was thought his experience in the native languages would be
useful to the expedition,--my companion hired a small beden, or
half-decked arab vessel, by the month, to take us about wherever we
pleased; and on the 5th january 1857, having engaged a respectable
half-caste arab sheikh, named said, to be our guide and interpreter,
we took leave of our host, set sail, and steered northwards, coasting
along the shores of this beautiful clove island, until we left it, and
shortly afterwards sighted the still more lovely island of pemba, or
"the emerald isle" of the arabs--named, doubtless, from the surprising
verdure of its trees and plants. here we called in at chak-chak, the
principal place, where there is a rude little fort and small garrison
of beluch soldiers, and a wali, or governor. starting the following
morning, we put to sea again, and in three days--sailing against a
strong southerly current, aggravated by a stiff north-easterly breeze,
almost too much for our cranky little vessel, and which frightened the
crew and our little timid sheikh so much that they all lost presence
of mind, and with the greatest difficulty were repressed from
"'bouting ship," and wrecking themselves, together with us, on the
shores of the coast--we harboured in the mombas creek.

mombas on the north, like kilua on the south, are the two largest
garrison towns belonging to the sultan on the main shores. they each
have a wali or governor, custom officers, and a beluch guard; and have
certain attractions to the antiquarian in the shape of portuguese
ruins. we left our traps here to be housed by a banyan called
lakshmidos, the collector of customs,[34] and started on the 17th
january to visit mr rebmann, beyond the hills overlooking this place.
it was a good day's work, and was commenced by rowing about ten miles
up the rabbai branch of the creek we were in, until we arrived at the
foot of the hills bearing the same name, beyond which his house
stands. this inlet was fringed with such dense masses of the mangrove
shrub, on which clung countless numbers of small
tree-oysters,--adhering to their branches in clusters, and looking as
though they subsisted thereon after the manner of orchidaceous
plants,--that we could obtain no view whatever, save of the hills
towering to the height of some ten hundred or twelve hundred feet
above us. the water-journey over, we commenced the ascent of rabbai,
and, soon crowning it by a steep slope, passed into the country of the
wanyika, the first true negro tribe of my acquaintance, and by a
gentle decline passing through quiet little villages, we entered,
after a walk of five miles, the kisuludini mission-house, and there
found mr rebmann, with his amiable english wife, living in their
peaceful retreat. they gave us a free and cordial welcome and
comfortable lodging, and supplied us with all the delicacies of a dry
wanyika season, for there was now a drought in the land, and
consequently a famine. so hard were the times for the unfortunate
negroes, that they were forced against their wills to support the bulk
of their families by the sale of some of its junior members to keep
themselves alive.

and now, according to mr rebmann, to aggravate their predicament, they
were on the eve of a more dreadful enemy still than famine,--that of
the attacks of a marauding party of the barbarous pastoral masai, a
neighbouring tribe, who were now out engaged in pillaging some of the
wanyika villages, not far from this, of the few heads of cattle which
they keep as a "safety-valve" against the scourge of droughts. the
oddest thing to me was to see the placid equanimity with which mr
rebmann and his wife coolly delayed a day or two, notwithstanding the
near proximity of this savage band of thieves, to pack up their kit
comfortably before leaving the place; but we were assured by the
reverend gentleman that the masai cared but little for anything save
beef, and they therefore did not apprehend rough usage at their hands.
the air of this high land is cool and pleasant, and the scenery from
the station overlooking the sea was very picturesque and serenely
beautiful. the rabbai hills are an outlying range running parallel to
the coast, or more properly, i should say, an abattis, which supports
a high but slightly depressed flattish interior, gently declining
westwards.

after a good night's rest we returned to mombas, housed ourselves in
the dwelling appointed for our use by lakshmidos, and had many
civilities paid us by the wali (governor) and coloured merchants of
the place, who brought us fruits and paid us other delicate little
attentions by way of showing their regard. the wanyika having by this
time sent to the mombas fort for aid to support them against the
attacks of their enemies, we felt some alarm at the position of mr and
mrs rebmann, and again returned to kisuludini, to see if we could be
of any use to them: but not so; they were as fearless as before, and
would not leave their house until everything had been well packed up
and sent away.[35] we now bade them adieu a second time, and returned
to our house at mombas. here we heard that several of the beluch
troops had been despatched against the masai, and that some skirmishes
had taken place, but they were nothing of any material consequence.

seeing that there was this little excitement on the direct road to
kadiaro and the kilimandjaro, captain burton thought it unadvisable to
venture on that line, the more especially so as he judged the mombas
people were not over-well disposed to our travelling into the
interior. further, he had heard of fresh attractions on the coast, in
the shape of ruins, both portuguese and persian;--those places from
which, in former ages, the portuguese--who had been led there by the
adventurous vasco de gama, and were the first european occupants of
these dark lands--were driven southwards by the arabs. moreover, he
heard that the mountain of kilimandjaro was just as accessible to us
from tanga or pangani, a little farther down the coast, where there
would probably be no war-parties standing in our way, as the case was
here.

i, on the other hand, did not see any cause of alarm, for i thought we
could easily have walked round the masai party; but i saw various
reasons for abandoning the projected plan of looking at the
kilimandjaro. in the first place, it had been already discovered by mr
rebmann; it was, moreover, rather distant for our limited time; it
would require more money than our limited funds could admit of; and
last, though not least, as we had some time to spare, i thought it
would be much more agreeable to spend it in hippopotamus-shooting on
the coast, and on what game we might find on the hills of usumbara, if
we perforce were to go through that kingdom on our way towards the
kilimandjaro, an idea that had struck us; for though usumbara had been
traversed formerly by the church missionaries, it was still a maiden
country for the sportsman. considering mombas as a starting-point for
an excursion into the interior, i can conceive no direction more
interesting or advantageous for any one to embark upon. dr krapf has
already been as far as kitui, in the country of ukambani, fourteen
marches distant only from mombas, and there he heard of a snowy
mountain called kenia, lying probably to the northward of and on the
same hill-range as mount kilimandjaro, which most likely separates the
river-systems of the east from those which flow to the westward into
the nile. in confirmation of this impression, i would mention the fact
that a merchant caravan of about two hundred men, whilst we were
stopping here, arrived from kitui laden with elephant ivories, which
they had bartered for american sheeting, venetian beads, and brass
wire, &c. &c., in the district of ukambani; and they described the
country in the most glowing terms, as possessing a healthy climate,
pleasant temperature, wholesome water, and an abundance of provisions,
both flesh and grain: they had, moreover, camels and donkeys as beasts
of burden, which alone denotes a great facility for travelling in
eastern africa, where usually men take the place of beasts. the
wakambani porters belonging to this caravan, as many as there were,
were boisterous, humorous savages, who, as they danced and paraded
about the town, all armed in savage fashion with bows and spears and
sharp knives, in fact anything but clothes, looked as wild as animals
just driven from a jungle. noise and dancing seemed their principal
delight, and they indulged in it, blowing horns and firing muskets
with a boisterous glee, which showed the strangest contrast to the
tame hindus and other merchant residents of the place.

captain burton now decided on quitting mombas; and on the 24th
january, after embarking in our little beden, we set sail southwards.
following the coastline, we touched at the villages of gasi, wasin,
tanga--where i had my first flirtations with the hippopotami, of which
more hereafter--and tangata, to inspect ruins and make inquiries about
the interior condition of the country.

the coast-line was one continuous undeviating scene of tropical
beauty, with green aquatic mangroves growing everywhere out into the
tidal waves, with the beetal, palmyra, and other palms overtopping
this fringe; and in the background a heterogeneous admixture, an
impervious jungle, of every tree, shrub, and grass, that characterise
the richest grounds on the central shores of this peculiar continent.
the little islands we passed amongst, and all the reefs that make
these shores so dangerous to the navigator, whether large or small,
were the produce of the industrious little coral insect. the lime with
which their cellular beds are composed being favourable to vegetable
growth, leaves it no wonder that the higher grounds and dryer lands
are thus so densely clothed. the few villages there are, bordering on
the coast, are poor and meagre-looking, but their inhabitants were
very hospitable, especially where there were any banyans. nothing
could exceed the mingled pride and yearning pleasure these exotic
indians seemed to derive from having us as their guests. being indian
officers, they looked upon us as their guardians, and did everything
they could to show they felt it so. our conversing in their own
language, and talking freely of their native land, must, as indeed
they said it did, have felt to them as if after a long banishment they
were suddenly thrown amongst their old and long-lost friends. to us
how strange did these things appear! that men so full of life,
good-breeding, intelligence, and affections--so meaning and
calculating in their conversation, so gentlemanly in their
behaviour--should live this life of utter banishment, amidst these
savages, devoid of all sympathetic affections, and knowing not even
what things constitute the commonest business of life. and why? to
make a little money for their latter days, when life's enjoyment has
passed away. their wretched case would not be so bad, only that, from
being hindus, they cannot marry or even bring their wives from india
with them. it is a position even worse than that of hermits. tanga was
the most considerable of all the places we visited, being the grand
terminus of those caravans, which, passing immediately to the south of
the kilimandjaro, traverse the masai country to burgenei, near the
south-east corner of the victoria n'yanza (lake).[36] here captain
burton again commenced making inquiries about the route to
kilimandjaro, and how, if that could not be managed, considering the
means at our disposal, we could march into usumbara, see the capital
fuga, and pay the king, kimueri, a cursory visit; but being more or
less dissuaded from this, evidently, as it afterwards appeared, by the
timorous inclinations rather than from any real difficulties which
presented themselves to the mind of our sheikh, captain burton thought
it better to see first what could be done at pangani.

we arrived in the mouth of the pangani river on the 3d february; and,
immediately on landing, were met by all the grandees of the place, who
welcomed us as big men, and escorted us to a large stone house in the
town overlooking the river. on the way to this domicile, a number of
black singers were formed in line to serenade us, and they danced and
sang in real negro peculiarity, with such earnest constancy that,
although a novel sight, we were glad to be rid of them long before
they were tired of performing. all inquisitive about other people's
concerns, the panganyites at once eagerly busied themselves to find
out what our intentions were in coming there, and accordingly began to
speculate on what they could make out of us. first the diwans
(head-men) wanted us to pay our footing in the town; but that only
provoking a sharp rebuff, they began a system of "making
difficulties." to go to the kilimandjaro we must have a large and
expensive escort, or nobody would go with us. but this we were not
persistent in, for two reasons: in the first place, having frittered
away so much time at mombas, and in inspecting ruins on the way from
it, we had no time left ere the kuzi, or little rains precursory to
the great monsoon, which would shortly set in on the high lands near
the great mountain, would fall and impede our progress; and, in the
second, we were short of cash. next we contemplated a flying trip to
fuga, for which alternative sultan majid had provided us with
introductions to the king, kimueri, living there; and this, of course,
being known to the people through the medium of sheikh said, they at
once beset our doors to meet our proposals and make fresh
difficulties.

king kimueri's son, who happened to be here on his way to zanzibar,
presuming we had presents for the king, mildly begged us to give them
up to him at once, he securing us a passage to his father,--a cool
request, which, of course, was just as coolly rejected. and now
everybody, evidently actuated by him, stood in our way at every turn.
we must not go the straight road, as the wazegura living on the right
bank of the pangani river were "out," and in open hostilities with the
wasumbara, and would intercept our passage; and, instead, they
proposed our going _via_ tangata, a much longer route, but open to us
if we only took a sufficient number of men, and paid handsomely for
the convenience. considering that the value attachable to the
undertaking would be magnified in our minds in proportion to the
amount of obstacles which had to be surmounted, difficulty upon
difficulty was now conjured up and produced as fast as they thought
they were working upon our inclinations. sometimes our advisers would
go, and then the opposite. they were verily as coy in their
advancements and retractions as a woman who, in love, gives and takes
with a wavering man on whom she has set her heart at a time when he is
fearful of giving way to her little seductive artifices.

at this perplexing juncture, quite unforeseen by us, the jemadar of a
small beluch garrison (chogue), about seven miles up the river, came
to pay his respects, and by a clever artifice--purely an oriental
dodge, as anybody who has lived in india will readily admit--at once
perceiving an advantage to be gained by which he might profitably fill
his own pocket at the same time that he would save ours, and give a
job to his own beluches to the prejudice of those avaricious
panganyites, offered us an inducement which was too good not to be at
once accepted. the plan was simply this: he was to leave at once and
return to chogue, and make arrangements with his guard for our
reception there, whilst we, feigning abandonment of all our plans,
were to prepare for a shooting excursion up the river, with only one
servant and our sporting gear with us. this trick succeeded admirably,
without provoking the slightest suspicion on anybody's part. leaving
our sheikh and one "boy" behind to take care of our property, we now
set sail in a small canoe, on the 6th february, and made for chogue.
the river was extremely tortuous and filled with hippopotami, who, as
the vessel advanced up the tidal stream, snorted and grunted as if
they felt disposed to dispute our passage; but this never happened.
inquisitive in the extreme about the foreign intruders, they could not
resist continually popping up their heads and apparently inviting us
to take a shot, which, as may readily be imagined, i lost no
opportunity in complying with. whether i killed any or not is
difficult to say, for as the guns were fired their heads immediately
disappeared, to rise no more, or, if not struck, to peep above again
some way distant at our stern. to shoot hippopotami properly, one must
have time to wait for the receding of the tide, when, if killed, their
bodies would be left exposed on the sandy bottom; or, if in deep
water, to wait until, being filled with gases, they would float by the
buoyancy of their bodies.

there was little to be seen in this voyage of any interest, for the
curtains of mangroves, with palms and other trees growing in almost
impenetrable denseness, veiled in our view to the limits of the
stream's breadth. as the tide was running out at sunset, we halted for
its return at pombui, a small village on the left bank, and resumed
the journey after midnight. in two hours we reached the mooring-place
opposite the station, chogue, fastened the canoe, and lay down to
sleep. early after dawn, the jemadar, with his guard, advanced to meet
us, welcomed us with sundry complimentary discharges of their
matchlocks, and escorted us to their post. the jemadar's guard was
composed of twenty-five men, most of whom were here, whilst the other
few held another fort on the top of a hill called tongue. volunteers
were now called for to accompany us, who would carry each his arms, a
little food, and such baggage as might be necessary--just enough to
march up rapidly to fuga, to have a little shooting in some favourable
jungles near there, and return again as soon as possible. there was no
difficulty, as the jemadar foresaw. the beluches receive so little pay
from their sultan that any windfall like this was naturally welcome;
and out of the little garrison five men were readily enlisted; besides
these, they supplied four slave-servants, and two men as guides.

with one day's delay in preparing, we left chogue in the evening, and
commenced a scrambling journey; all the men fully loaded, and
ourselves much the same.

on the morning of the following day, after travelling by a footpath
over undulating country, we mounted the hill of tongue, and put up in
the fort.

mount tongue is itself an outlying hill, detached from the massive
clusters of usumbara by a deep rolling valley of broken ground of
desert forest, which as we afterwards saw by their numerous tracks,
must contain, during the rainy season, vast herds of the elephant and
buffalo, as well as antelopes and lions, though but few animals of any
kind appeared to be here now. looking south by west from this height
over the broad valley of the pangani, i was able to take compass
bearings on some cones in the uzegura country, belonging to the nguru
hills. the whole country below appeared to be covered with the richest
vegetation, and in the river we could hear the murmuring sound of a
waterfall, said by the beluches to be a barrier to the navigation of
the river any farther inland.[37]

10th february.--early in the morning we bid tongue fort adieu, and,
descending by its northern slopes, threaded our way, arching round by
north to westward, through the forests below, until late in the
evening we arrived within a short distance of a hill called khombora;
and here, as the darkness of night was closing in, the party by
accident divided: some, taking a more northerly track--the proper
one--soon came across a nullah containing water,--the thing we were
then in search of; whilst we, following on the heels of the guide,
lost the way, and, coming upon the same watercourse lower down the
stream, bivouacked for the night alongside some green, fetid, stagnant
pools, in which a host of young frogs were keeping up a merry concert.
we fired guns, but without avail, the distance we were separated by
being too great for the reports to be heard.

next morning, after following up the nullah for some considerable
distance, we lit upon the rest of the party, sitting by a chain of
pools, where they had bivouacked like ourselves; and, mingling
together, commenced the march. at this time it was discovered that the
surveying compass had been left behind, and i wished to return at
once; but as captain burton was knocked up, and would not wait for me,
the instrument was abandoned. then, with the party complete, we passed
to the northward of khombora, by an indenture of the ground lying
between it and a much larger hill, called sagama, which hill forms the
south-eastern buttress of the usumbara masses; and opening into the
valley of pangani again, we put up at a wazegura village on its right
bank, called kohode, crossing the river by a ferry. here my companion,
with all the party--save one exceptional seedi soldier, mabarak
bombay[38] who knew a little hindustani, and acted as my
interpreter--stopped a day, to recover from the fatigues of the late
harassing march, for they appeared thoroughly knocked up, and to revel
on a feast of milk and flesh which, with great cordiality, was
supplied them by sultan momba, a wazegura chief. we were now fifteen
miles distant from the compass, and i called on volunteers to forsake
these festivities and follow me back to get it. it was a great trial,
and bombay of all the party was the only man who could be induced to
go; but he, as will be seen in many subsequent parts of this book, was
ever ready to do anything for anybody, and cheerfully started off with
me. the first thing which we saw after crossing by the ferry was a
dead hippopotamus, lying on the greensward of the alluvial plain,
encircled by a number of savages (washenzi), all armed with bow and
arrows, looking wistfully at their prostrate game. the animal was
scarcely cold, and lay on the ground like a large shapeless hog
bristling with arrows. it appeared from their statements that these
savage hunters had been waiting on the plain for several hours before
daybreak, expecting the animal on his retreat from his nocturnal
excursions under the lee of the sagama hill, in quest of rank grasses
and forest-trees growing there, which compose his ordinary food, to
make for a certain deep place in the river, by which means he would
have to cross the plain exactly where they posted themselves: they
were not mistaken. the beast advanced at the usual time for going to
his watery abode, and the savages at once surrounded him on the plain;
by firing arrows from all sides at once in rapid succession, the huge
awkward beast knew not which man to set on first, and in its constant,
fruitless, angry endeavours to reach the last assailant, he soon
became exhausted, and was eventually overpowered.

we now passed on to the nullah, followed it down to the place of
bivouac, found the compass, and returned. in the bed of the nullah
there were numerous pools, both large and small, but all were rapidly
drying up, and destroying the numerous fish they contained; for as
this desiccation increased, and the pools became smaller, the fervid
sun heated the little remaining water to such an overpowering extent,
that the fish, half suffocated, turned on their backs and became an
easy prey to the numerous green-and-brown-striped iguanas that eagerly
thronged their brinks for food. as we approached, these horrid-looking
reptiles hurried off like frightened cats to their hiding-places, some
bearing fish away in their mouths, whilst others, less composed,
dropped what they had half devoured, to evade us all the more readily.
this intense fear of man is caused by their being the negro's game,
who eat them with the same kind of pleasure and relish which a
frenchman has for frogs. cheerily did we trip along, for
bombay--astonished at my oddities or peculiarities, as he thought
them, when i picked up a river shell, or dilated much on the antelopes
and birds we sometimes saw--broke into a series of yarns about his
former life, and of the wild animals with which he was familiar in his
fatherland. he seemed to me a surprisingly indefatigable walker, for
he joked and talked and walked as briskly at the end of thirty miles
as he did at starting. as the sun was setting we repassed the place
where the hippopotamus had been slain, but not a vestige of his flesh
or a bone remained to mark the place--every morsel had been carried
off for food. ferrying across the river, we were heartily met by the
boisterous, mirthful sultan momba, who instantly on our landing shook
us heartily by the hand, commented on our walking powers with
enthusiastic pride, invited us to his palace (grass hut), and gave us
a royal repast.

13th february.--we started early in the morning, and after crossing
the pangani, took to the beaten track and followed up the valley.
nearly at the outset we passed over the luangera river, close to its
junction with the pangani, by a tree thrown across it. the stream,
though not broad, is deep and sullen, and, by native report, is
infested with crocodiles. this may easily be imagined, for the
pangani, a much rougher, and therefore a less favourable river for
them, undoubtedly is so. here, near the junction of these two rivers,
their united valleys cause a much greater expanse of alluvial ground;
and had we turned northwards, we might have reached fuga in two short
marches, by crossing over a mountain spur called vugiri; but in
consideration of our men, who had to carry unusually heavy burdens, we
determined to follow on our course up the valley by a lower and more
easy road, passing round instead of over this spur. with the vugiri
hills overhanging us on the right, like a bluff high wall, prettily
decked with bush and tree, and the boisterous pangani murmuring on the
left hand, which now in many places was divided by little inhabited
islands, we tracked along the valley until we reached pasunga, when we
left the river still coming from the north-west, and then, turning
sharply round the extreme western point of the vugiri spur, we entered
on a cultivated plain in a direct line facing fuga. here, on the
second day, being overtaken by a fierce storm, we put up in some sheds
outside a village. there were three small cones, called mbara, close
to us west by north; but besides these, to the northward, there was
nothing save an uninterrupted plain of the densest jungle leading up
to the makumbara mountains, about ten miles distant. the village
itself was enshrouded in a dense thicket, which was entered by the
narrowest of passages, cut through branches for security's sake, and
was further protected by piles and stakes against the attacks of
enemies. everybody here feels an insecurity to life and property,
which makes people wonder how they ever can be happy. prosperous they
are not, and never will be, until such time as enlightened men may
happen to come amongst them to teach their chiefs the art of
governing. of all villages the most secure from attack seem those that
are situated on the river islands, where the division of the stream
affords a natural moat, which no african art can overcome.

15th february.--after waiting for a few hours this morning for the
rain to subside, we got under way and made straight for fuga. the
first half of the journey led us by well-beaten footpaths through flat
cultivated fields of sugar-cane and bananas, tamarind-trees, papaws,
and various jungle shrubs, filling up the non-arable surface; and then
began a steep ascent by rudely-beaten zigzags, to ease the abruptness
of the hill, on which the capital is situated. the whole face of this
hill was clothed with large timber trees, around which, here and
there, entwining their trunks, clung the delicate sarsaparilla vine;
and beneath them flourished, as by spontaneous growth, the universal
plantain, a vegetable grown in this country as we do corn, and, like
it also, regarded as the staff of life. at length, after a little hard
toiling, we emerged from this prodigious wooding, and found ourselves
on a naked, bold, prominent point overlooking the whole plain we had
left behind, and from which we could clearly see its entire
dimensions. to the northward, as already said, was the makumbara
range, a dense compact mass of solid-looking hills, much higher than
the spur we stood upon, but joining it to the north-eastward; whilst
its other extremity shot out to the north-westward, until it seemed as
though it were suddenly cut off by the pangani river.

beyond the river, again, looking across the western extremity, but
farther back than it, other large hills, bedimmed by distance, could
be seen tending in a south-westerly direction, which in all
probability are a link of the longitudinal chain, which, as our maps
will show, fringe the whole of the southern continent of africa.[39]
the country directly beyond the river valley rose into gentle
undulations, but on this side all was flat and densely wooded, save in
one little spot to the north-west of the mbara cones, where a sheet of
water or small lake made a bald conspicuous place--and here it was, by
native report, that elephants and other large game abounded.

having now completed the survey, we proceeded along the shoulder of
the hill just ascended, and passing by a ferruginous spring, soon
arrived unexpectedly to its inhabitants at fuga, the capital of
usumbara, and presented ourselves to the astonished fugaites, who
naturally began to question what could possibly be the meaning of this
stolen march on them; for, contrary to the laws of the land, no
permission to enter their _citadel_ had been asked, and consequently
no one was prepared to see or receive us. access to the village was
strictly forbidden to us strangers, until at least the king, whose
palace is situated some distance from it, had been consulted with in a
certain form of ridiculous ceremony, which, for politeness' sake, we
felt ourselves bound to assent to, but in the meanwhile we took
possession of some huts close to it, where mr krapf, our church
missionary, had some years previously, when visiting this place, taken
up his abode.

a deputation was now sent with our compliments to the king, kimueri,
soliciting an audience; and just before sunset they returned to say we
must remain where we were for the present, as the king was in doubt
about our intentions, regarding us with suspicion, as we had come
through the territories of his enemies, the wazegura, which was
tantamount to a hostile declaration; and, moreover, he required
leisure for his mganga or magic-man to divine what time would be
propitious for an interview. the old man was in the wane of life,
being upwards, it was said, of one hundred years of age, and his
people thought he must die. hearing this, captain burton, playing with
his superstitious credulity, devised a plan by which he at once gained
access to him. the king was lying on a cartel in a small round hut,
encompassed on his near side by swarthy-looking counsellors, who
smoked small pipes and sat on low three-legged stools. sultan majid's
introductory letter was now read, and all seemed satisfied as to who
we were. we then returned to our lodgings, and found a bullock and
some meal of indian corn and plantains sent as a honorarium after us.
next morning, agreeably to promise, at the king's direction, a guide
came to show us about the place, in order that captain burton might be
able to pick some leaves or herbs to make a certain decoction which
would insure longevity; but as none such could be found, and the old
king had seen through the trick, entrance to the "town" was still
forbidden.

whilst wandering about, however, we chanced to see a number of negroes
turn out and chase down an antelope. it was a very small rufous-brown
animal, much about the size and shape of the kakur deer of the
himalayas; but what struck me most was, the peculiarity of its having,
unlike all hitherto known african species, four points of horns. in
consequence of this great novelty, i tried to purchase its head, but
the greedy savages who caught it, coveting the flesh, would not, for
any consideration, let me have it, and i never saw another killed.
rain poured down in torrents at night, and the days remained so
cloudy, that we felt the kuzi or little monsoon had now fairly set in,
and the sooner we could get away from the high lands so much the
better for us. in the evening (15th february), therefore, we sent our
return presents to the king, and asked permission to be allowed to go.
a very civil reply was given, with certain additions, for which i
could not help admiring him; but he would not accept the present, and
we might go whenever we pleased.

thinking to obviate to the best of my ability any differences with
these benighted but cunning people, and to leave as favourable an
impression of our visit as i could, i advised captain burton to
distribute amongst the ministers those things which had been brought
for the king, and this accordingly was done, but not without
considerable debate, and the finally reluctant sanction of the
king.[40] the next morning (16th february) saw us descending the
heights of fuga, and in a few hours' walk we left the cool congenial
air incidental to 4000 or 5000 feet, for the hot, damp, morbid, close
atmosphere of the jungle plains below, in which, as miss nightingale
would say, you could palpably smell a fever. then following the old
route, we came down to the pangani; and in three days' travelling
along it, as captain burton, being no sportsman, would not stop for
shooting, we put up once more at kohode, with sultan momba.

19th february.--to vary the way and gain a better knowledge of the
river, we now determined to follow it all the way down to chogue,
which we made on the third day, spending the two intervening nights at
the wazegura villages of kiranga and kizungu. the valley, though much
varied, was generally contracted by the closing in of the rolling
terminal abutments of the tongue hill, on the one side--with rising
land, and little conical hills almost joining, which overhung the
river on the right bank in uzegura, on the other side. we seldom met
any people on the line of march; and the land being totally
uncultivated, excepting in the immediate vicinity of these villages,
we felt as though we were travelling through a desert wild of dreary
jungle--which, indeed, it was. no animals, and scarcely any birds,
moved about to cheer and keep the road alive; and all was silent, save
the constant gurgling, rumbling sound of the river's waters as they
rushed rapidly over boulders and often plunged down many little falls
in the bed of the stream. on passing the point opposite to tongue
fort, we saw the cause which produced the sound like a cataract, which
formerly we had heard when standing on its summit. it was, indeed, a
cascade of considerable dimensions, and would, doubtless, be a sight
of pleasing grandeur when the river is full.

in the afternoon of the 22d, as we approached chogue, the little
beluch jemadar, with the rest of the guard, turned out to welcome us,
and gloat over the successful termination of an artful trick he felt
himself the father of. he spread mats for us to sit upon, and brought
the universal coffee-pot and some sweetmeats as a relish to refresh us
and increase the triumph; for the little man, no doubt, thought he had
gained his prize.

the next three days were spent in making different excursions,
shooting hippopotami in the vicinity of the outpost; and on the 26th
february we returned to pangani, captain burton dropping down the
river in a canoe, whilst i, to complete the survey of the country and
to check my former work on the river, walked with bombay to pombui,
ferried across the stream there, and came by the right bank down to
bueni, on the shore of the pangani bay. here i recrossed the river
again, and found sheikh said and my "boy" gaetano, with all the traps
arranged, ready at the old house for our reception. our vessel had
been discharged at the expiration of the first month's engagement, and
we were now expecting a second one from zanzibar, to continue the
cruise southward along the shore, and gain a fuller knowledge of the
various entrepots of caravans. i had by this time become much attached
to bombay, for i must say i never saw any black man so thoroughly
honest and conscientious as he was, added to which, his generosity was
unbounded; and i thought (as we shall see afterwards proved to be the
case) he would turn out a most valuable servant for the future
journey--a regular "friday." the only difficulty now was how to obtain
his discharge from the service he was in; but this the jemadar, who
followed us down to pangani to receive the wages for the men who
accompanied us to fuga, said he would arrange, if bombay felt willing,
and would leave a substitute to act for him whilst he was away. a
compact was accordingly concluded, by which bombay became my servant
for the time being, at five dollars per mensem, with board and lodging
on the journey found him. the jemadar now left us, with a present for
himself and the hire of his men, and we were all alone.

on the 1st march a violent bilious fever attacked me, and also floored
captain burton and valantine. it appeared in the form of the yellow
jack of jamaica, and made us all as yellow as guineas; and had we been
able to perspire, i have no doubt we should have sweated out a sort of
yellow ochre which a painter might have coveted. in this state we lay
physicking ourselves until the 5th, when a vessel chartered by the
consul, and stored with delicacies of all kinds by our generous,
thoughtful old host for the journey southwards, arrived, and took us
off. captain burton being still under the influences of this terrible
scourge, and very ill, even to absolute prostration, and occasionally
wandering in his mind, he gave up his projected plans, and we returned
at once to zanzibar, reaching it on the 6th march.

the masika, or great vernal rainy season which follows up the sun as
it passes to the north, broke over the island of zanzibar this year
early in april, and was expected to last for its normal period of
forty days. for this to subside we had now to wait here as patiently
as we could, occupying the spare time so forced on us in purchasing an
outfit and in preparing for the journey. it was highly interesting to
see here at this season of the year, as we well could do, so near the
equator, the regular systematic procession of the wind and rain
following up the sun in its northward passage. the atmosphere, at this
time and place, was heated and rarefied by the vertical rays of the
sun; that produced a vacuum, which the cold airs of the south taking
advantage of, rush up to fill, and with their coldness condense the
heated vapours drawn up daily from the ocean and precipitate them back
again on the earth below. this occurring and continually repeating day
by day, for a certain time, nearly in the same place, fills the air
with electric excitement, which causes thunder and lightning to
accompany nearly every storm. the atmospheric air's being so
surcharged with electricity was palpably felt by the nervous system;
at any rate, judging from myself, i can only say i experienced a
nervous sensibility i never knew before, of being startled at any
sudden accident. a pen dropping from the table even would make me
jump. whilst stopping here, the colonel's house was one continuous
scene of pleasure and festivities. the british consulate was the
common rendezvous of all men: arab, hindi, german, french, or
american, were all alike received without distinction or any forced
restraint. indeed, the old consul literally studied the mode of making
people happy; and zanzibar, instead of being an outlandish place, such
as to make one wonder how men could exile themselves by coming here,
was really a place of great enjoyment. the merchants, on the other
hand, were not less hospitably inclined, and constantly entertained
and gave very handsome dinners.

besides our consulate, there is a french and an american one, and the
european merchants were composed of french, germans, and
americans,--the dark-coloured ones being principally confined to
arabs, hindis, and the wasuahili, or coast people. taking advantage of
the time, especially the evenings, i spent most of them in rating the
chronometers and getting all the surveying instruments into working
order; whilst captain burton, besides book-making, busied himself in
making all the other arrangements for the journey, such as purchasing
venetian beads, brass wire, and american sheetings, &c., which come
here in shiploads round the cape of good hope, or in buying donkeys
for our riding and their transport. then in the cool of the mornings
we took social walks or rides through the clove plantations, or
amongst the palms, mango-trees, and orange gardens, treating
pine-apples, which grew like common weeds on the roadsides, as if they
were nothing better than ordinary turnips, though when placed upon the
table they are certainly as delicious as any living fruit. the only
fine houses are those occupied by the europeans and the sultan, and
they front the harbour, which is considered a very good one, and is
very constantly filled with shipping, the sultan's men-of-war, foreign
square-rigged vessels, and a host of buggaloes from aden, muscat,
catch, and bombay. the back of the town is very much like a common
indian bazaar, but there is a hollow square in its centre, which
nowadays is peculiar to this place--it is the slave-market.
immediately after every fresh importation, you can see in the early
morning unhappy-looking men and women, all hideously black and ugly,
tethered to one another like horses in a fair, and calculating men,
knowing judges of flesh and limb, walking up and down, feeling their
joints and looking out to make a bargain. women, of course, sell
better than the men, being fitted to more general purposes. for a good
wife any sum might be given. but the saddest sight which came under my
observation was the way in which some licentious-looking men began a
cool, deliberate inspection of a certain divorced culprit who had been
sent back to the market for inconstancy to her husband. she had learnt
a sense of decency during her conjugal life, and the blushes on her
face now clearly showed how her heart was mortified at this unseemly
exposure, made worse because she could not help it.

the amount of information gathered by the expedition concerning the
interior of africa at zanzibar, i may say was _nil_, to use captain
burton's own words, in a letter written at the british consulate, 22d
april 1857, and published in the proceedings of the royal geographical
society, page 52 of no. 1, vol. ii., where these remarkable words may
be found:--"we could obtain no useful information from the european
merchants of zanzibar, who are mostly ignorant of everything beyond
the island. the arabs and sawahilis, who were averse to, and fearful
of, white travellers, _did_ give us information, but it was worse than
none."

the orders of the royal geographical society to captain burton were
these, in short:--"the great object of the expedition is to penetrate
inland from kilwa, or some other place on the east coast of africa,
and make the best of your way to the reputed lake of nyassa; to
determine the position and limits of that lake; to ascertain the depth
and nature of its waters and tributaries; to explore the country
around it, &c. having obtained all the information you require in that
quarter, you are to proceed northwards towards the range of mountains
marked upon our maps as containing the probable sources of the bahr el
abiad, which it will be your next great object to discover."

bearing these instructions in mind, captain burton naturally felt
desirous of penetrating from kilwa to attack the missionaries' great
slug-shaped lake in the tail. the reason why captain burton was
prevented from doing so, i shall show again by a reference to the same
letter. he writes thus:--"the accounts formerly made in europe about
the facility of penetrating inland from kilwa (quiloa), and the
economy of travel in that region, are fabulous. the southern sawahili
are more hostile to explorers than the inhabitants of the northern
maritime towns, and their distance from the seat of government renders
them daring by impunity. but last year they persuaded the waginda
tribe of the interior to murder a peaceful arab merchant, in order
that strangers might be deterred from interfering with their commerce.
messrs krapf and erhardt, of the mombas mission, spent a few hours at
kilwa, where they were civilly received by the governor and citizens,
but they were sadly deceived in being led to imagine that they could
make that port their starting-point." "we shall probably land at
bagamoyo."

now we did land at kaole, close to bagamoyo, but the route from kilwa
to nyassa was afterwards safely traversed by dr boscher, though, after
that, boscher was murdered by some thieves in whiyow.[41] having said
this much, which shows that captain burton was bent on going by the
great caravan road to ujiji, i shall first of all dwell on the nature
of the men we took with us, what agreements they made, and what pays
they received. i feel bound to state this, as i was called on by the
consul to witness the agreements, and much of the journey was
performed by myself alone; added to which, the funds of the expedition
fell short, and as soon as it did so, i made a compact with captain
burton that, in the event of the government not paying our excess of
expenditure, i would pay him the half of all those expenses; and i did
so to the extent of l600 after the journey was over.

our cafila bashi (head of caravan) was sheikh said, who went with us
to mombas. he said he would go with us if we only went to ujiji on the
tanganyika lake, but he would not go on any other line, as his
relatives feared some accident might befall him. for this he received
from colonel hamerton 500 dollars; and he was promised, if he
succeeded in pleasing us, 1000 dollars more, and a gold watch, on his
return. there was a little more difficulty in getting a beluch escort,
for the consul cautioned us that we could not expect the sultan to
give one gratis. he asked the sultan, however, for men, and we were
told we might have them out of his army if they would volunteer. the
head jemadar then came to make a bargain, and we said we would give to
each man five dollars a-month, besides rations and clothing the same
as bombay got. this bait would not take, and we could not get one man
until the consul again spoke to the sultan about it. a party then were
marched up to the consulate, when, in addition to the pay already
offered, they demanded flesh as often as we killed a goat, bullock, or
sheep, but they would not serve more than six months. to this last
stipulation, arguing on my somali experiences, i stoutly objected, but
was overruled both by colonel hamerton and captain burton. the colonel
then gave the jemadar of our party a present of 25 dollars, and to
each of the privates 20 dollars, to set themselves up for the journey.
further, he promised them a handsome reward on their return if they
served us well, to be paid out of some public fund in the same way as
he paid sheikh said.

the rest of our escort consisted of some slaves, who were furnished us
by a banyan named ramji. they were armed with muskets, and enlisted
not to carry loads, but to guard us and treat with the native chiefs
on the line of march, as they were familiar with the road to ujiji,
and were friends with the chiefs we should find there. their pay was
fixed at 5 dollars a-month, half of which they were to keep
themselves, and the other half to be given to their master in
compensation for the loss of their services. further, six months'
wages at this rate was to be paid in advance, and the remainder when
the journey was over; but leaving a clause to the effect that they
might be discharged at any time, supposing we did not require their
services further.

everybody at zanzibar did his best to assist us, from the sultan
downwards. the european merchants gave us most hospitable
entertainments on a very grand scale, and mr oswald, in particular,
transported our spare boxes to england. ladha, the customs master, was
our banker, and found our outfit of beads, brass wire, and cloths,
which is the circulating medium in inner africa instead of money.
colonel hamerton was so anxious for the success of the expedition,
that he obtained a man-of-war--the corvette artemise--from the sultan
on the 16th june 1857, and accompanied us over to kaole on the
mainland, notwithstanding at the time he was dangerously ill. for some
time we were detained here collecting baggage animals to carry our
property. all we wanted could not be procured, as the bulk of the
pagazis (porters) had been previously hired by the ivory merchant
traders. however, thirty-six men were sent forward to zungomero by
ladha, and we bought thirty donkeys. when all was done that could be
done in a hurry, we bade the generous old colonel adieu, as well as
his medical attendant, mr frost, and commenced the journey inland on
the 27th june--ladha promising to send the rest of our property after
us as soon as he could find carriage for it.

i have already published, in my 'journal of the discovery of the
source of the nile,' a description of the countries we had to pass
through to reach kaze, so i shall not trouble the reader with the
details on that point, contained in my previous publication. suffice
it to say that kaze is a place in the centre of unyamuezi, the land of
the moon, situated in s. lat. 5o, and e. long. 33o. it is occupied by
arab merchants as a central trading depot, and is fast expanding into
a colony. at the time of our starting we did not know that, but
imagined we should find a depot of that sort at ujiji. travelling
through the country of uzaramo, both captain burton and i contracted
fevers. mine occasionally recurred at various intervals, but his stuck
to him throughout the journey, and even lasted till some time after he
came home.

at zungomero we overtook the porters that ladha had sent forward. i
calculated our rate of expenditure, found we had not enough for the
necessities of the journey, and prevailed on captain burton to write
back for more, notwithstanding our government subsidy was out; for i
could not brook the idea of failure, even though we might have to pay
our future travelling expenses out of our own pockets.

i was also shocked here to hear that our good stanch friend, colonel
hamerton, had died shortly after we left him. it struck a blow also on
the minds of sheikh said and the beluches, for they naturally thought
their security was gone. sheikh said, however, i must say, very much
to his credit, soon shook off his fears, and even told the beluches to
do the same, for another consul would come who would see justice done
to them.

we then left zungomero and crossed the east coast range. during this
stage the beluches one day struck for food, as they were disappointed
at our not killing goats, the fact being that i had supplied our table
with guinea-fowls. an altercation took place which i had to settle, as
was invariably the case when any difficulties arose in the camp. i
managed the matter by ordering a march. this brought them to reason,
for hitherto they thought we should be afraid to go without them. the
consequence was that, finding themselves left behind, they forgot
their wrath and followed us. on the way they found captain burton
lying by the roadside prostrate with fever, and, taking compassion on
him, brought him into camp. they were forgiven; but another difficulty
arose in consequence of our donkeys dying faster than their loads were
consumed, so that we could not have proceeded had not some of ramji's
slaves carried some loads for us. our supplies were already too short
for our journey; nevertheless, captain burton said he would pay them
if they carried our loads.

they did so; but captain burton, on my saying we should find it
difficult to keep faith with them, mildly replied, "arabs made
promises in that way, but never kept them; and, moreover, slaves of
this sort never expected to be paid." i grew angry at this
declaration--for i had seen tibet ruined by officers not keeping faith
with their porters--and argued the matter, but without effect. on
arrival at ugogi, on the west flank of the east coast range, our
cattle were so completely done up that we could not have proceeded,
had it not happened, by the greatest luck in the world, we found some
pagazis here desirous of going to their homes in unyamuezi. they had
been left there by a caravan in consequence of a quarrel which
originated in seduction. this lift took us over the interior plateau
across ugogo and mgunda mkhali to kaze, where we arrived on the 7th
november 1857. the arabs we found collected here were extremely
obliging, especially one sheikh snay, who furnished us with a house,
looked after our wants, and supplied us with much useful information.

on my opening messrs rebmann and erhardt's map, and asking him where
nyassa was, he said it was a distinct lake from ujiji, lying to the
southward. this opened our eyes to a most interesting fact, for the
first time discovered. i then asked what the word ukerewe meant, and
was answered in the same way, that it was a lake to the northward,
much larger than ujiji, and this solved the mystery. the missionaries
had run three lakes into one. in great glee at this i asked snay,
through captain burton, whether or not a river ran out of that lake?
to which he replied, he thought the lake was the source of the jub
river; and he strongly advised us, if our only motive in coming here
was to look at a large piece of water, to go to it instead of on to
ujiji. captain burton and i argued that we thought the lake in
question, which was the victoria n'yanza, would more likely prove to
be the source of the nile, from the simple fact of our knowing the jub
to be separated from the interior plateau by the east coast range.
time wore on. our pagazis all left us, as is usual, on their arriving
at their homes, and we had to procure more to carry our traps on to
ujiji.

captain burton attempted to get porters by giving presents to the best
two men we had for that purpose, but without the least effect. they
promised and kept us waiting, but never performed. in the mean time
captain burton got desperately ill, whilst i picked up all the
information i could gather from the arabs, with bombay as an
interpreter.[42] i heard that the babisa, who live on the west of
nyassa, came to the southeast corner of tanganyika in quest of ivory
for the kilua merchants. that caravans sometimes reached the cazembe
country by land, crossing the manungu river, and also went to katata
for copper, which is of a dark rich red colour, and more prized than
the imported copper. some arabs also went down the tanganyika,
disembarked at manungu, and reached cazembe. further, i heard from
snay and his associates that the kitangule and katonga rivers ran out
of the ukerewe lake (victoria n'yanza), and that another river, which
is the nile, but supposed by them to be the upper portions of the jub
river, ran into the n'yanza. further conversation explained this away,
and i made them confess that all these rivers ran exactly contrary to
the way they first stated; as it was obvious, if the n'yanza was the
source of the jub, the last river alluded to must flow out of the lake
instead of into it, as they had said. still more extraordinary than
this, i heard from snay that vessels frequented some waters to the
northward of the equator, which confirmed some statement i had heard
of the same nature in 1855 when travelling in the somali country. i
could not fix in my own mind exactly what this alluded to; but i felt
so curious to find out, and so sure in my own mind that the victoria
n'yanza would prove to be the source of the nile, i proposed going to
see it at once, instead of going on to ujiji. the route, however, to
the northward was said to be dangerous--usui alone would seize all our
property--and captain burton preferred going west. how this even was
to be managed then seemed very dubious, for not one of ramji's slaves
would come near us, and the beluches were so tired of the journey they
begged for their discharge, crying it was their due, as they had
served their turn of service. they wanted no pay if we would only give
them certificates of satisfaction. we would not do this; and then they
said, as they saw we wanted them, they would not desert us.

we had now been at kaze rather more than a month, and i thought
captain burton would die if we did not make a move, so i begged him to
allow me to assume the command _pro tem._, and i would see what i
could do to effect a move. accordingly, as he agreed, i made
arrangements with snay, and transported half our property to zimbili,
where i prepared a house for captain burton's reception on the 5th
december. three days after he was carried over, and he begged me to
take account of his effects, as he thought he would die. i cheered him
up, and found the change of air had the effect i desired. still
ramji's men would not come out to camp, so i tried with bombay to see
what they had at heart, and then it transpired they had not been paid
for carrying loads on from the east coast range to kaze. in a minute i
recollected captain burton's promise to them, brought them into the
camp, and paid them their dues.

bit by bit we pushed on to msene, another small colony occupied
chiefly by wasuahili, and here we ate our christmas dinner. the
country was rich in the extreme, and well under rice cultivation.
ramji's men were quite in their element here, and even bombay became
so _love-sick_ we could hardly tear him away. we broke ground on the
10th january 1858, but not until three days after did the whole of our
men join us. i saw now we had too many mouths to feed; and as ramji's
men had been hired more for show than work, their term of service had
just expired, and i did not think we should require their guns any
more, i begged captain burton to give them a present each, with leave
to go to their homes--for it must be remembered they possess homes in
unyamuezi as well as at zanzibar. the men craved to be allowed to go
on with us, but i, more than any one else, insisted we ought to get
rid of them, for the reasons stated above; and so they were
discharged. i found we were on a great decline of the country draining
to the westward; the soil was deeper and richer, and the vegetation
proportionately richer as we went on with the journey. shortly we
crossed the malagarazi river in a bark canoe at the mpete ferry, and
found that, after having travelled along this decline from kaze about
one hundred and fifty miles, we began to ascend at the eastern horn of
a large crescent-shaped mass of mountains overhanging the northern
half of the tanganyika lake, which i am now about to describe.

this mountain mass i consider to be the true mountains of the moon,
regarding which so many erroneous speculations have been ventured. i
infer this because they lie beyond unyamuezi (country of the moon),
and must have been first mentioned to geographical inquirers by the
wanyamuezi (people of the moon), who have from time out of mind
visited the coast, and must have been the first who gave information
of them. i am the more satisfied of the correctness of this view from
observing the missionaries' map; for what could have induced them to
call their great lake, in general terms, the sea of the moon, except
that it lay beyond the country of the moon?[43] the mountains form a
crescent overhanging the north end of the lake, large and deep in the
body to the north, and tapering to horns as they stretch southwards
down the east and west sides of the lake. our line of march, about six
hundred rectilinear geographical miles, had been nearly due west from
zanzibar. here you may picture to yourself my bitter disappointment
when, after toiling through so many miles of savage life, all the time
emaciated by divers sicknesses and weakened by great privations of
food and rest, i found, on approaching the zenith of my ambition, the
great lake in question nothing but mist and glare before my eyes. from
the summit of the eastern horn the lovely tanganyika lake could be
seen in all its glory by everybody but myself. the fact was, that
fevers and the influence of a vertical sun had reduced my system so,
that inflammation, caught by sleeping on the ground during this rainy
season, attacked my eyes, brought on an almost total blindness, and
rendered every object before me enclouded as by a misty veil.
proceeding onwards down the western slopes of the hill, we soon
arrived at the margin of the lake, and hired a canoe at ukaranga to
take us to ujiji, the chief place on the lake which arabs frequent.
this is a name we had long been familiar with, and is the term by
which the arabs in general call this lake. this mode of nomenclature
is quite in accordance with the usual custom of semi-civilised people,
as we see in arabia, where the arabs call the red sea by the names of
the different ports which they frequent. thus, for instance, at
jeddah, it is called by them the sea of jeddah, whilst at suez it is
the sea of suez, &c. &c. the tanganyika lake, lying between 3o and 8o
south latitude, and in 29o east longitude, has a length of three
hundred miles, and is from thirty to forty broad in its centre. the
surface-level, as i ascertained by the temperature of boiling water,
is only eighteen hundred feet, and it appears quite sunk into the lap
of these mountains. its waters are very sweet, and abound with
delicious fish in great variety. the fertility of the northern end of
the lake surpassed anything we had hitherto seen; but this was not
surprising when duly considered. the hills, instead of being, as on
the great plateau we had recently left, outcrops of granite, were
composed of argillaceous sandstone. rains there lasted all the year
round, and the temperature was very considerable. in consequence of
this the sides of the lake are thickly inhabited by numerous tribes of
the true negro breed, amongst which the most conspicuous are the
wabembe cannibals, into whose territory no arabs durst ever venture.
bombay, my interpreter, describes them as being very dreadful
creatures, who are "always looking out for some of our sort." the port
we finally arrived at is called kawele, a small village in the ujiji
district. here we landed all our property, and took up our abode in a
deserted house, which had been left to decay by some arab merchants.
the beluch guard received a present of cloth; they seemed very glad
the land march was at an end. in that respect we felt the same as our
men; but we found ourselves in the hands of a very ill-disposed chief,
called kannina--tyrannical, and, as such savages invariably are,
utterly unreasonable. a heavy tribute was paid for the advantages of
this savage monster's _protection_, and we were too short of beads and
cloth to search out for and pay another chief of more moderate
inclinations. this was a serious misfortune; for, having once entered
his dominions and established our headquarters there, we could not
very well leave them. this was the more distressing, as comfort,
pleasure, and everything is at the mercy of these headsmen's wills,
and we were destined for a long sojourn here. to war with these chiefs
is like "cutting off the nose to spite the face." nobody, let his
desire be what it may, dares assist you without the chief's full
approbation; and kannina's austere government we had occasion to feel
from first to last. our first object on arrival was to get boats for
the survey of the lake; but here arose a difficulty. hostilities were
rife with nearly all the border tribes; and the little cockle-shell
canoes, made from the hollowed trunks of trees, are not only liable to
be driven ashore by the slightest storm, but are so small that there
is but little stowage-room in them for carrying supplies. the sailors,
aware of this defect, fear to venture anywhere except on certain
friendly beats, and therefore their boats were quite unfitted for our
work.

this dilemma made us try to hire a dhow or sailing-vessel, belonging
to sheikh hamed bin suleyim, living at kasenge island, on the opposite
or western shore, as it was the only boat afloat on these waters
fitted for carrying provisions and moving about independent of the
border clans. on arriving here, we were so disabled by
sickness--captain burton utterly, and i suffering from ophthalmia, and
a weakness in the lower extremities resembling paralysis--that my
companion proposed sending our ras-cafila, sheikh said, across the
lake to bargain for the dhow, and applied to kannina for the means of
transport. at first he seemed inclined to treat, though at an
exorbitant rate; but when we came direct to terms, he backed entirely
out. fortunately we obtained a boat and crew from another chief, at
the extortionate charge of four kitindis and four dhotis merikani,
besides the usual sailors' fee. the dhoti is a piece of american
sheeting measuring eight cubits. the cubit is still the negro's yard,
the same as was adopted at the time of the flood; they have no other
measure than that with which nature has provided them--viz., the first
joint of the arm, or from the elbow to the top of the middle finger.
these kitindis are a sort of brass-wire bracelet worn on the lower arm
by the negro females, coiled up from the wrist to the elbow, like a
wax taper circling up a stick or stem. sometimes this wire is reformed
and coiled flat out round the neck to a breadth of about eight inches,
and gives the wearer's head much the appearance of john the baptist's
standing in the middle of a charger. these necklaces are never taken
off, so at night, or resting-time, the wearer on lying down places a
block of wood or stone beneath his head, to prevent the wire from
galling. this concession of the chief was given under the proviso that
kannina would not object, which, strange to say, he promised not to
do; and hopes were entertained of an early departure. however, this,
like every other earthly expectation in these black regions, was
destined to be disappointed. in the first place, an african must do
everything by easy stages, nor can he entertain two ideas in his head
at the same moment. first a crew had to be collected, and when
collected to be paid, and when paid the boat was found to be
unseaworthy, and must be plugged; and so much time elapsed, and plans
were changed. but after all, things, it happened, were wisely
ordained; for the time thus wasted served to recruit my health, as i
employed it in bathing and strolling gently about during the cool of
the mornings and evenings, and so gained considerable benefit. there
is a curious idea here with regard to the bathing-place, in fancying
the dreaded crocodile will obey the mandates of a charm. they plant
the bough of a particular tree in the water about fifty yards from the
shore, which marks the line of safe bathing, for within it they say
the animal dares not venture. at noon, protected by an umbrella, and
fortified with stained-glass spectacles, i usually visited the
market-place, with beads in hand, to purchase daily supplies. the
market is held between the hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m., near the port,
and consists of a few temporary huts, composed of grass and branches
hastily tied together. most of these are thrown up day by day. the
commodities brought for sale are fish, flesh, tobacco, palm oil, and
spirits, different kinds of potatoes, artichokes, several sorts of
beans, plantains, melons, cotton, sugar-cane, a variety of pulse and
vegetables, ivories, and sometimes slaves. between these
perambulations, i spent the day reclining with my eyes shut. at
length, after eighteen days' negotiations, improved by these
constitutional diversions and rest, and longing for a change,
especially one that led across the sea, and afforded the means of
surveying it, i proposed to go myself, and treat directly with sheikh
hamed. captain burton threw obstacles in my way at first, saying
canoes were not safe on such a large lake, but he finally gave in when
i pressed the advisability of my doing so. this intention soon reached
the ears of kannina, who, fearing that he might thus lose much cloth,
threw obstacles in the way, and most unjustly demanded as large a
passport-fee for my crossing as had been given to the other chief;
which demand we were obliged to comply with, or the men would not take
up an oar.





                          chapter ii.

canoes--the crews--the biography of bombay--the
voyage--crocodiles--the lake scenery--kivira island--black beetles--an
adventure with one of them--kasenge island--african slavery.



3d march 1858.--all being settled, i set out in a long narrow canoe,
hollowed out of the trunk of a single tree. these vessels are mostly
built from large timbers, growing in the district of uguhha, on the
western side of the lake. the seats of these canoes are bars of wood
tied transversely to the length. the kit taken consists of one load
(60 lb.) of cloth (american sheeting), another of large blue beads, a
magazine of powder, and seven kitindis. the party is composed of
bombay, my interpreter; gaetano, the goanese cook-boy; two beluch
soldiers; one nakhuda or sea-captain, who sometimes wore a goat-skin;
and twenty stark-naked savage sailors: twenty-six in all. of these
only ten started, the remainder leaving word that they would follow
down the coast, and meet us at a _khambi_ (encampment), three miles
distant, by 12 o'clock. the ten, however, sufficient for the occasion,
move merrily off at 9 a.m., and in an hour we reached the rendezvous,
under a large spreading tree on the right bank of the mouth of the
river ruche.

the party is decidedly motley. the man of quaintest aspect in it is
sidi mabarak bombay. he is of the wahiyow tribe, who make the best
slaves in eastern africa. his breed is that of the true woolly-headed
negro, though he does not represent a good specimen of them
physically, being somewhat smaller in his general proportions than
those one generally sees as stokers in our steamers that traverse the
indian ocean. his head, though woodeny, like a barber's block, is lit
up by a humorous little pair of pig-like eyes, set in a generous
benign-looking countenance, which, strange to say, does not belie him,
for his good conduct and honesty of purpose are without parallel. his
muzzle projects dog-monkey fashion, and is adorned with a regular set
of sharp-pointed alligator teeth, which he presents to full view as
constantly as his very ticklish risible faculties become excited. the
tobacconist's "jolly nigger," stuck in the corner house of ----
street, as it stands in mute but full grin, tempting the patronage of
accidental passengers, is his perfect counterpart. this wonderful man
says he knows nothing of his genealogy, nor any of the dates of the
leading epochs of his adventurous life,--not even his birth, time of
captivity, or restoration.

but his general history he narrated to me as follows, which i give as
he told it me, for this sketch may be of interest, presenting, as it
does, a good characteristic account of the manner in which slave-hunts
are planned and carried into execution. it must be truthful, for i
have witnessed tragedies of a similar nature. the great slave-hunters
of eastern africa are the wasuahili or coast people; formerly slaves
themselves, they are more enlightened, and fuller of tricks than the
interior people, whom they now in their turn catch. having been once
caught themselves, they know how to proceed, and are consequently very
cautious in their movements, taking sometimes years before they
finally try to accomplish their object. they first ensnare the
ignorant unsuspicious inlanders by alluring and entangling them in the
treacherous meshes of debt, and then, by capturing and mercilessly
selling their human game, liquidate the debt, insinuatingly advanced
as an irresistible decoy to allure their confiding victims.

bombay says: "i am a mhiyow; my father lived in a village in the
country of uhiyow (a large district situated between the east coast
and the nyassa (lake) in latitude 11o s.) of my mother i have but the
faintest recollection; she died whilst i was in my infancy. our
village was living in happy contentment, until the fated year when i
was about the age of twelve. at that period a large body of wasuahili
merchants and their slaves, all equipped with sword and gun, came
suddenly, and, surrounding our village, demanded of the inhabitants
instant liquidation of their debts (cloths and beads), advanced in
former times of pinching dearth, or else to stand the consequences of
refusal.

"as all the residents had at different times contracted debts to
different members of the body present, there was no appeal against the
equity of this sudden demand, but no one had the means of payment.
they knew fighting against firearms would be hopeless; so after a few
stratagems, looking for a good opportunity to bolt, the whole village
took to precipitate flight. most of the villagers were captured like
myself; but of my father, or any other relatives, i never more gained
any intelligence. he was either shot in endeavouring to defend
himself, or still more probably gave leg-bail, and so escaped. as soon
as this foray was over, all the captives were grouped together, and
tethered with chains or ropes, and marched off to kilua, on the east
coast (in latitude 9o s.) arrived there, the whole party embarked in
dhows, which, setting sail, soon arrived at zanzibar. we were then
driven to the slave-market, where i was bought by an arab merchant,
and taken off to india. i served with this master for several years,
till by his death i obtained my liberation. my next destination was
zanzibar, where i took service in the late imaum's army, and passed my
days in half-starved inactivity, until the lucky day when, at chongue,
you saw and gave me service."

shortly after we had encamped under the rendezvous tree, and begun our
cooking, some villagers brought ivories of the elephant and
hippopotamus for sale, but had to suffer the disappointment of meeting
a stranger to merchandise, and straightway departed, fully convinced
that all wazungu (or wise, or white men) were mere fools for not
making money, when they had so good an opportunity. noon and evening
passed without a sign of the black captain or the remaining men. we
were in a wretched place for a halt, a sloping ploughed field; and,
deceived by the captain's not keeping his promise, were unprepared for
spending the night there. i pitched my tent, but the poor men had
nothing to protect them. with the darkness a deluge of rain descended;
and, owing to the awkwardness of our position, the surcharged earth
poured off a regular stream of water over our beds, baggage, and
everything alike. to keep the tent erect--a small gable-shaped affair,
six feet high, and seven by six square, made of american sheeting, and
so light that with poles and everything complete it barely weighs one
man's load--i called up the men, and for hours held it so by strength
of arm. even the hippopotami, to judge by the frequency of their
snorts and grunts, as they indulged in their devastating excursions
amongst the crops, seemed angry at this unusual severity of the
weather. never from the 15th of november, when the rainy season
commenced, had we experienced such a violent and heavy downpour.

4th.--halt. the morning is no improvement on the night. the captain
now arrives with most of the remaining crew, fears the troubled
waters, and will not put out to sea. in consequence of this
disappointment, a messenger is sent back to kawele, to fetch some
fresh provisions and firewood, as what little of this latter article
can be gathered in its saturated state is useless, for it will not
burn. during the afternoon the remainder of the crew keep dropping in,
and at nightfall seventeen hands are mustered.

5th.--at 3 a.m. the sea subsides, and the boat is loaded.--to pack so
many men together, with material, in so small a space as the canoe
affords, seems a difficulty almost insurmountable. still it is
effected. i litter down amidships, with my bedding spread on reeds, in
so short a compass that my legs keep slipping off and dangling in the
bilge-water. the cook and bailsman sit on the first bar, facing me;
and behind them, to the stern, one-half the sailors sit in couples;
whilst on the first bar behind me are bombay and one beluch, and
beyond them to the bow, also in couples, the remaining crew. the
captain takes post in the bows, and all hands on both sides paddle in
stroke together.

fuel, cooking-apparatus, food, bag and baggage, are thrown
promiscuously under the seats. but the sailors' blankets, in the shape
of grass matting, are placed on the bars to render the sitting soft.
once all properly arranged, the seventeen paddles dash off with
vigour, and, steering southwards, we soon cross the mouth of the
ruche. next ukaranga, the last village on this line down the eastern
shore, lying snugly in a bay, with a low range of densely-wooded hills
about three miles in its rear, is passed by dawn of day, and about
sunrise the bay itself is lost to sight.

the tired crew now hug a bluff shore, crowned with dense jungle, until
a nook familiar to the men is entered under plea of breakfasting. here
all hands land, fires are kindled, and the cooking-pots arranged. some
prepare their rods and nets for fishing, some go in search of fungi (a
favourite food), and others collect fuel. gaetano, ever doing wrong,
dips his cooking-pot in the sea for water--a dangerous experiment, if
the traditions of tanganyika hold good, that the ravenous hosts of
crocodiles seldom spare any one bold enough to excite their appetites
with such dregs as usually drop from those utensils; moreover, they
will follow and even board the boats, after a single taste.

the sailors here have as great an aversion to being followed by the
crocodile as our seamen by a shark, and they now display their
feelings by looks and mutterings, and strictly prohibiting the use of
the cooking-pot on that service again. breakfast ready, all hands
eagerly fall to, and feast away in happy ignorance of any danger, when
suddenly confusion enters the camp, and, with the alarming cry that
foes are coming, all hurry-skurry for the boat, some with one thing,
some with another. the greater part of the kit is left upon the
ground. a breathless silence reigns for several minutes. then one
jumps off and secures his pot; another succeeds him, and then more,
till courage is gained to make a search, and ascertain the cause of
the alarm. sneaking, crawling in the bush, some peering this way,
others listening that, they stealthily move along, until at length a
single man, with arrow poised, in self-defence i suppose, is pounced
upon.

his story of why he came there, who and how many are his comrades,
what he wants in such a desert place, and why he carries arms, though
spoken with a cunning plausibility, has no effect upon the knowing
sailors. they proclaim him and his party, some eight or ten men, who
are clamorously squabbling in the jungle at no great distance, to be a
rough and lawless set of marauders, fearing to come out and show
themselves on being challenged, and further insist that none ever
ventured in such wilds who had not got in view some desperate
enterprise. in short, it was proverbially men of their sort who were
the general plunderers of honest navigators. they therefore seize his
weapons, cut and break his bow and arrows, and let him go; though some
of the crew advocate his life being taken, and others, that the whole
party should be chased down and slaughtered. the sailors then return
to the canoe, each vaunting his part in this adventurous exploit, and
bandying congratulations in the highest spirits. they are one and all
as proud of this success, and each as boastful of his prowess, as
though a mighty battle had been fought and won.

on starting again we pass alongside another bluff, backed by small
well-wooded hills, an extension of the aforesaid east horn of the
moon, and cross a little bay, when the lazy crew, tired by two hours'
work, bear in with the land, and disembark, as they say, to make some
ropes, or find some creepers long and strong enough for mooring this
_mighty_ canoe. it is now eleven o'clock; there is more rest than
work, a purely negro way of getting through the day; three hours went
in idleness before, and now five more are wasted. again we start, and
after crossing a similar small bay, continue along a low shelving
shore, densely wooded to the water's edge, until the malagarazi
river's mouth is gained. this river is the largest on the eastern
shore of the lake, and was previously crossed by the caravan on its
way from kaze, in small bark canoes, much rougher, but constructed
something similarly to those of the americans. each of these canoes
contains one man and his load, besides the owner, who lives near the
ferry, and poles the vessel across. still to the eastward we have the
same tree-clad hilly view, beautiful in itself, but tiresome in its
constant sameness. after a stretch, and half an hour's pipes and
breathing, we start afresh, and cross the bay into which the river
debouches.

here tall aquatic reeds diversify the surface, and are well tenanted
by the crocodile and hippopotami, the latter of which keep staring,
grunting, and snorting as though much vexed at our intrusion on their
former peace and privacy. we now hug the shore, and continue on in the
dark of night till mgiti khambi,[44] a beautiful little harbour
bending back away amongst the hills, and out of sight of the lake, is
reached at 11 p.m. could but a little civilised art, as whitewashed
houses, well-trained gardens, and the like, vary these evergreen hills
and trees, and diversify the unceasing monotony of hill and dale, and
dale and hill--of green trees, green grass--green grass, green trees,
so wearisome in their luxuriance,--what a paradise of beauty would
this place present! the deep blue waters of the lake, in contrast with
the vegetation and large brown rocks, form everywhere an object of
intense attraction; but the appetite soon wearies of such profusion,
without the contrast of more sober tints, or the variety incidental to
a populous and inhabited country. there are said to be some few
scattered villages concealed in these dense jungles extending away in
the background, but how the shores should be so desolate strikes one
with much surprise. the naturally excessive growth of all vegetable
life is sufficient proof of the soil's capabilities. unless in former
times this beautiful country has been harassed by neighbouring tribes,
and despoiled of its men and cattle to satisfy the spoilers and be
sold to distant markets, its present state appears quite
incomprehensible. in hazarding this conjecture, it might be thought
that i am taking an extreme view of the case; but when we see
everywhere in africa what one slave-hunt or cattle-lifting party can
effect, it is not unreasonable to imagine that this was most probably
the cause of such utter desolation here. these war-parties lay waste
the tracks they visit for endless time. indeed, until slavery is
suppressed in africa, we may expect to find such places in a similarly
melancholy state.

immediately on arriving here i pitch my tent, and cook a meal; whilst
the sailors, as is usual on arrival at their camping-grounds, divide
into parties,--some to catch fish, others to look for fungi, whilst
many cook the food, and the rest construct little huts by planting
boughs in a circle in the ground and fastening the tops together,
leaving the hut in the shape of a haycock, to which they further
assimilate it by throwing grass above; and in rainy weather it is
further covered by their mats, to secure them against getting wet. as
only one or two men occupy a hut, to accommodate so large a party many
of them have to be constructed. it is amusing to see how some men,
proud of their superior powers of inventiveness, and possessing the
knack of making pleasant what would otherwise be uncomfortable, plume
themselves before their brethren, and turn them to derision: and it
appears the more ridiculous, as they all are as stark naked as an
unclothed animal, and have really nothing to boast of after all.

6th.--the following morning sees us under way, and clear of the
harbour by sunrise; but the gathering of clouds in the south soon
cautions the weather-wise sailors to desist from their advance. timely
is the warning; for, as we rest on our oars, the glimmer of lightning
illuminates the distant hills; whilst low heavy rolling clouds of
pitchy darkness, preceded by a heavy gale and a foaming sea, outspread
over the whole southern waters, rapidly advance. it is an
ocean-tempest in miniature, which sends us right about to our former
berth. some of our men now employ themselves in fishing for small fry
with a slender rod, a piece of string, and an iron hook, with a bait
of meat or fish attached; whilst others use small handnets, which they
place behind some reeds or other cover, to secure the retreating fish
as he makes off on being poked out of his refuge on the opposite side
by a wand held for that purpose in the sportsman's other hand. but the
majority are occupied in gathering sticks and cooking breakfast till 1
p.m., when the sea abates, and the journey is resumed. during this
portion of the journey, a slight change of scenery takes place. the
chain of hills running parallel with the shore of the lake is broken,
and in its stead we see small detached and short irregular lines of
hills, separated by extended plains of forest, thickly clad in
verdure, like all the rest of the country. after two hours' paddling,
we stand opposite the luguvu river, and rest awhile to smoke; then
start again, and in an hour cross the mouth of the little river hebue.
unfortunately these streams add nothing to the beauty of the scenery;
and were it not for the gaps in the hills suggesting the probable
course of rivers, they might be passed without notice, for the mouths
are always concealed by bulrushes, or other tall aquatic reeds; and
inland they are just as closely hidden by forest vegetation. in half
an hour more we enter a small nook called luguvu khambi, very deep,
and full of crocodiles and hippopotami. on landing, we fire the usual
alarm-guns--a point to which our captain is ever strictly
attentive--cook our dinners, and turn in for the night. here i picked
up four varieties of shells--two univalves and two bivalves--all very
interesting from being quite unknown in the conchological world. there
were numbers of them lying on the pebbly beach.

7th.--we started at dawn as usual; but again at sunrise, the wind
increasing, we put in for the shore, for these little cranky boats can
stand no sea whatever. here a herd of wild buffaloes, horned like the
cape ones, were seen by the men, and caused some diversion: for,
though too blind myself to see the brutes at the distance that the
others did, i loaded and gave them chase. whilst tracking along, i saw
fresh prints of elephants, which, judging from their trail, had
evidently just been down to drink at the lake; and sprang some
antelopes, but could not get a shot. the sea going down by noon, we
proceeded, and hugged a bluff shore, till we arrived at insigazi, a
desert place, a little short of kabogo, the usual crossing-point.
although the day was now far advanced, the weather was so promising,
whilst our stores were running short, that impatience suggested a
venture for the opposite shore to kivira, an island near it, and
which, with the uguhha heights in the background, is from this
distinctly visible. this line is selected for canoes to cross at, from
containing the least expanse of water between the two shores, between
ujiji and the south end. the kabogo island, which stands so
conspicuously in the missionaries' map that hung on the royal
geographical society's walls in 1856, is evidently intended for this
kabogo or starting-point, near which we now are, and is so far rightly
placed upon their map as representing the half-way station from ujiji
to kasenge, two places on opposite sides of the lake, whither the arab
merchants go in search of ivory. for kabogo, as will be seen by my
map, lies just midway on the line always taken by boats travelling
between those two ports--the rest of the lake being too broad for
these adventurous spirits. in short, they coast south from ujiji to
kabogo, which constitutes the first half of the journey, and then
cross over.

on the passage i carefully inquired the names of several points and
places, to take their bearings, and to learn the geography of the
lake, but all to no purpose. the superstitious captain, and even more
superstitious crew, refused to answer any questions, and earnestly
forbade my talking. the idea was founded upon the fear of vitiating
their _uganga_ or "church," by answering a stranger any questions
whilst at sea; but they dread more especially to talk about the places
of departure or arrival, lest ill luck should overtake them, and
deprive them of the chance of ever reaching shore. they blamed me for
throwing the remnants of my cold dinner overboard, and pointed to the
bottom of the boat as the proper receptacle for refuse. night set in
with great serenity, and at 2 a.m. the following morning (8th march)
when arriving amongst some islands, close on the western shore of the
lake--the principal of which are kivira, kabizia, and kasenge, the
only ones inhabited--a watch-boat belonging to sultan kasanga, the
reigning chief of this group, challenged us, and asked our mission.
great fraternising, story-telling, and a little pipe ensued, for every
one loves tobacco; then both departed in peace and friendship: they to
their former abode, a cove in a small uninhabited island which lies
due south of kivira; whilst we proceeded to a long narrow harbour in
kivira itself, the largest of all these islands. fourteen hours were
occupied in crossing the lake, of which two were spent in brawling and
smoking. at 9 a.m. the islanders, receiving intelligence of our
arrival, came down the hill of which this island is formed, in great
numbers, and held a market; but as we were unprovided with what they
wanted, little business could be done. the chief desideratum was flesh
of fish or beast, next salt, then tobacco--in fact, anything but what
i had brought as market money, cloth and glass beads. this day passed
in rest and idleness, recruiting from our late exertions.

at night a violent storm of rain and wind beat on my tent with such
fury that its nether parts were torn away from the pegs, and the tent
itself was only kept upright by sheer force. on the wind's abating, a
candle was lighted to rearrange the kit, and in a moment, as though by
magic, the whole interior became covered with a host of small black
beetles, evidently attracted by the glimmer of the candle. they were
so annoyingly determined in their choice of place for peregrinating,
that it seemed hopeless my trying to brush them off the clothes or
bedding, for as one was knocked aside another came on, and then
another; till at last, worn out, i extinguished the candle, and with
difficulty--trying to overcome the tickling annoyance occasioned by
these intruders crawling up my sleeves and into my hair, or down my
back and legs--fell off to sleep. repose that night was not destined
to be my lot. one of these horrid little insects awoke me in his
struggles to penetrate my ear, but just too late: for in my endeavour
to extract him, i aided his immersion. he went his course, struggling
up the narrow channel, until he got arrested by want of passage-room.
this impediment evidently enraged him, for he began with exceeding
vigour, like a rabbit at a hole, to dig violently away at my tympanum.
the queer sensation this amusing _measure_ excited in me is past
description. i felt inclined to act as our donkeys once did, when
beset by a swarm of bees, who buzzed about their ears and stung their
heads and eyes until they were so irritated and confused that they
galloped about in the most distracted order, trying to knock them off
by treading on their heads, or by rushing under bushes, into houses,
or through any jungle they could find. indeed, i do not know which was
worst off. the bees killed some of them, and this beetle nearly did
for me. what to do i knew not. neither tobacco, oil, nor salt could be
found: i therefore tried melted butter; that failing, i applied the
point of a penknife to his back, which did more harm than good; for
though a few thrusts quieted him, the point also wounded my ear so
badly, that inflammation set in, severe suppuration took place, and
all the facial glands extending from that point down to the point of
the shoulder became contorted and drawn aside, and a string of boils
decorated the whole length of that region. it was the most painful
thing i ever remember to have endured; but, more annoying still, i
could not masticate for several days, and had to feed on broth alone.
for many months the tumour made me almost deaf, and ate a hole between
the ear and the nose, so that when i blew it, my ear whistled so
audibly that those who heard it laughed. six or seven months after
this accident happened, bits of the beetle--a leg, a wing, or parts of
its body--came away in the wax.

it was not altogether an unmixed evil, for the excitement occasioned
by the beetle's operations acted towards my blindness as a
counter-irritant, by drawing the inflammation away from my eyes.
indeed, it operated far better than any other artificial appliance. to
cure the blindness i once tried rubbing in some blistering liquor
behind my ear, but this unfortunately had been injured by the journey,
and had lost its stimulating properties. finding it of no avail, i
then caused my servant to rub the part with his finger until it was
excoriated, which, though it proved insufficiently strong to cure me,
was, according to dr bowman, whom i have since consulted, as good a
substitute for a blister as could have been applied.

9th.--the weather still remaining too rough for sailing, i strolled
over the island, and from its summit on the eastern side i found a
good view of the lake, and took bearings of ujiji, insigazi, and a
distant point southwards on the eastern shore of the lake, called
ukungue. kivira island is a massive hill, about five miles long by two
or three broad, and is irregularly shaped. in places there are high
flats, formed in terraces, but generally the steeps are abrupt and
thickly wooded. the mainland immediately west is a promontory, at the
southern extremity of the uguhha mountains, on the western coast of
the tanganyika; and the island is detached from it by so narrow a
strip of water that, unless you obtained a profile view, it might
easily be mistaken for a headland. the population is considerable, and
they live in mushroom huts, situated on the high flats and easier
slopes, where they cultivate the manioc, sweet potato, maize, millet,
various kinds of pulse, and all the common vegetables in general use
about the country. poultry abounds in the villages.

the dress of the people is simple, consisting of small black monkey
skins, cat-skins, and the furs of any vermin they can get. these are
tucked under a waist-strap, and, according to the number they possess,
go completely or only half-way round the body, the animals' heads
hanging in front, and the tails always depending gracefully below.
these monkeys are easily captured when the maize is ripe, by a number
of people stealthily staking small square nets in contiguous line all
round the fields which these animals may be occupied in robbing, and
then with screams and yells, flinging sticks and stones, the hunters
rush upon the affrighted thieves, till, in their hurry and confusion
to escape, they become irretrievably entangled in the meshes. but few
of these islanders carry spear or bow, though i imagine all possess
them. they were most unpleasantly inquisitive, and by their stares,
jabber, and pointings, incessantly wanting me to show them everything
that i possessed, with explanations about their various uses, quite
tired out my patience. if i tried to get away, they plaguingly
followed after, so at last i dodged them by getting into the boat. to
sit in the tent was the worst place of all; they would pull up the
sides, and peer under like so many monkeys; and if i turned my head
aside to avoid their gaze, they would jabber in the most noisy and
disagreeable manner in order to arouse me.

10th.--we quit kivira early, and paddling s. 25o w., make the famous
fish-market in the little island kabizia, just in time to breakfast on
a freshly-caught fish, the celebrated _singa_,--a large, ugly,
black-backed monster, with white belly, small fins, and long barbs,
but no scales. in appearance a sluggish ground-fish, it is always
immoderately and grossly fat, and at this season is full of roe; its
flesh is highly esteemed by the natives. this island is very small,
with a gradual rising slope from the n.w. extremity; and at the s.e.
end assumes the form of a bull's hump. there is but one village of
twenty odd mushroom-shaped huts, chiefly occupied by fishermen, who
live on their spoils, and by selling all that they cannot consume to
the neighbouring islanders and the villagers on the mainland. added to
this, they grow maize and other vegetables, and keep a good stock of
fowls. i tried every mode of inducement to entice the crew away to
complete the journey, for the place of my destination, kasenge, was in
sight; but in vain. they had tasted this to them delicious fish, and
were determined to dress and lay by a good store of it to carry with
them. about noon khamis, a merchant from kasenge, bound for ujiji,
arrived, and kindly gave me a long needle to stir up the beetle in my
ear; but the insect had gone in so far, and the swelling and
suppuration of the wounds had so imbedded him, that no instrument
could have done any good. khamis, like myself, was very anxious to
complete his journey, and tried every conceivable means to entice his
crew away, but he failed as signally as i did. on the mainland
opposite to this, we see the western horn of these concavely-disposed
mountains, which encircle the north of the lake, and from hence the
horn stretches away in increasing height as it extends northwards. its
sea-ward slopes are well wooded from near the summit down to the
water's edge; but on the top, as though strong currents of air
prevailed, and prevented vegetation from attaining any height, grass
only is visible. westward, behind the island of kasenge, and away to
the southward, the country is of a rolling formation, and devoid of
any objects of interest.

11th.--the morning wind was too high for crossing from kabizia to
kasenge, but at noon we embarked, and after paddling for ninety
minutes s. 80o w., we arrived at the latter island, my destination.
sheikh hamed bin sulayyim, with many attendants and a host of natives,
was standing ready to receive me. he gave us a hearty welcome, took my
hand, and led me to his abode, placing everything at my disposal, and
arranging a second house for my future residence. these arab merchants
are everywhere the same. their warm and generous hospitality to a
stranger equals anything i have ever seen elsewhere, not forgetting
india, where a cordial welcome greets any incidental traveller.
hamed's abode, like all the semi-civilised ones found in this country,
and constructed by the wasuahili (or coast people), is made with good
substantial walls of mud, and roofed with rafters and brushwood,
cemented together with a compound of common earth, straw, and water.
the rooms are conveniently partitioned off for domestic convenience,
with an ante-room for general business, and sundry other enclosures
for separating his wives and other belongings. on the exterior of the
house is a _palaver_ platform, covered with an ample verandah, under
which he sits, surrounded by a group of swarthy blacks, gossiping for
hours together, or transacting his worldly business, in purchasing
ivory, slaves, or any commodities worthy of his notice. the dhow i had
come for, he said, was lying at ukaranga, on the eastern shore, but
was expected in a day or two, and would then be at my service. indeed
he had sent a letter by khamis, whom i met at kabizia, offering it to
captain burton, as soon as he had been made acquainted (by native
report, i imagine) with our desire of obtaining her. he thought,
however, that there might be some difficulty in forming a crew capable
of managing her, as this craft was too large for paddles, and no
natives understood the art of rowing, and, moreover, like all
easterns, they are not disposed to learn anything that their fathers
did not know before them. his own men were necessary to him, for in a
few days he intended marching to uruwa, a territory belonging to
sultan kiyombo, about a hundred miles south-west of this island.
during that trip, every one of the dhow sailors (who are slaves, and
the arabs' gun-bearers) would be in requisition. but he thought, if i
had patience to wait, he might be able to prevail on a few of the
dhow's present crew, men in his temporary employ, to take service with
me. my host gave me a full description of the lake. he said he had
visited both ends of it, and found the southern portion both longer
and broader than the northern. "there are no islands in the middle of
the sea, but near the shores there are several in various places,
situated much in the same way as those we are amongst; they are mere
projections, divided from the mainland by shoals or narrow channels. a
large river, called marungu, supplies the lake at its southern
extremity; and on a visit to the northern end, i saw one which was
very much larger than either of these, and which i am certain flowed
out of the lake; for although i did not venture on it, in consequence
of its banks being occupied by desperately savage negroes, inimical to
all strangers, i went so near its outlet that i could see and feel the
outward drift of the water." he then described an adventure he once
had when going to the north, with a boisterous barbarous tribe called
warundi. on approaching their hostile shore, he noticed, as he
thought, a great commotion amongst the fishing-boats, and soon
perceived that the men were concocting a plan of attack upon himself,
for they concentrated forces, and came at his dhow in a body of about
thirty canoes. conceiving that their intentions were hostile, he
avoided any conflict by putting out to sea, fearing lest an affray
would be prejudicial to future mercantile transactions, as stains of
blood are not soon effaced from their black memories. he further said
he felt no alarm for his safety, as he had thirty slaves with guns on
board. my retrospective opinion of this story--for everybody tells
stories in this country--is, that hamed's marungu river more likely
runs out of the tanganyika and into the nyassa, forming a chain of
lakes, drained by the shire river into the zambeze; but i did not,
unfortunately, argue it out with him. i feel convinced also that he
was romancing when talking of the northern river's flow, not only
because the northern end of the lake is encircled by high hills--the
concave of the mountains of the moon--but because the lake's altitude
is so much less than that of the adjacent plateau. indeed, the waters
of the lake are so low they would convey the impression that the
trough they lie in has been formed by volcanic agency, were it not
that dr livingstone has determined the level of the nyassa to be very
nearly the same as this lake; and the babisa, who live on the west of
the nyassa, in crossing the country between the two lakes to
luwemba,[45] cross the marungu river, and yet cross no mountain-range
there. with reference to the time which it would take us to traverse
the entire lake, he said he thought we should take forty-six days in
going up and down the lake, starting from ujiji. going to the north
would take eight days, and going to the south fifteen. as hamed had
said nothing about the hire of the dhow, though he had offered it so
willingly, i thought it probable that shame of mentioning it in public
had deterred him from alluding to the subject--so begged a private
conference. he then came to my house with bombay and a slave, a
confidant of his own, who could also speak hindustani, and was told,
through my medium bombay, exactly what things i had brought with me,
and requested to speak his mind freely, as i had called him especially
for business, and we were now alone. he still remained mute about the
price; but again saying i could have his dhow whenever i chose, he
asked permission to retire, and departed. puzzled at this procedure, i
sent bombay to observe him, and find out if he had any secret motives
for shirking so direct an appeal, and empowered him to offer money in
case my cloth and powder did not afford sufficient inducement. bombay
soon returned as much puzzled as myself, unable to extract any but the
old answer--that i was welcome to the dhow, and that he would try and
procure men for me. as a hint had reached me that hamed cast covetous
eyes on my powder-magazine, i tried enticing him to take some in part
payment for her; but he replied that he did not require anything in
payment, but would gladly accept a little powder if i had any to
spare. to this i readily assented, as he had been so constant and
liberal in his attentions to me ever since i landed on the island and
became his guest, that i felt it was the least i could do in return
for his generosity. indeed, he was constantly observing and inquiring
what i wanted, and supplied everything in his power that i found
difficult to obtain. every day he brought presents of flesh, fowl,
ducks (the muscovite, brought from the coast), eggs, plantains, and
ghee (clarified butter).

the island of kasenge is about one mile long, a narrow high ridge of
land lying nearly due north and south, and is devoid of trees, and
only a small portion of it is under cultivation. the lake washes its
northwestern end; the remainder is encircled by a girdle of water
about eighty yards broad. it appears, from being so imbedded in the
land, to be a part of the coast, to anybody approaching it from the
open lake. the population is very considerable, more so than that of
the other ports. they are extremely filthy in their habits, and are
excessively inquisitive, as far at least as gratifying their idle
curiosity is concerned. from having no industrial occupations, they
will stand for hours and hours together, watching any strange object,
and are, in consequence, an infinite pest to any stranger coming near
them. in appearance they are not much unlike the kaffir, resembling
that tribe both in size, height, and general bearing, having enlarged
lips, flattish noses, and frizzly woolly hair. they are very easily
amused, and generally wear smiling faces. the women are better dressed
than the men, having a cloth round the body, fastened under the arms,
and reaching below the knees, and generally beads, brass necklaces, or
other ornaments; while the latter only wear a single goat-skin slung
game-bag fashion over the shoulder, or, when they possess it, a short
cloth tied, kilt fashion, round the waist. they lie about their huts
like swine, with little more animation on a warm day than the pig has
when basking in a summer's sun. the mothers of these savage people
have infinitely less affection than many savage beasts of my
acquaintance. i have seen a mother bear, galled by frequent shots,
obstinately meet her death, by repeatedly returning under fire whilst
endeavouring to rescue her young from the grasp of intruding men. but
here, for a simple loin-cloth or two, human mothers eagerly exchanged
their little offspring, delivering them into perpetual bondage to my
beluch soldiers.

talking about slaves makes me always feel for this unfortunate land,
and reflect how foolish are all those outer nations who allow the
slave trade to go on. one quarter of the globe--and that, too, one
which might, if relieved of this scourge, be of the greatest
commercial advantage to us, both as a consuming and exporting
country--is entirely ruined. the horrors of the "middle passage" are
familiar to us by report, but they are nothing as compared with what
happens in the interior of the country when the capturing goes on.
there whole villages are destroyed in the most remorseless manner by
the slave-hunters to obtain their victims, for no one will yield so
long as he can fight for his freedom. the slave-hunters are not merely
confined to the coast men, for the interior chiefs are as fond of gain
as they are, and this sets one against the other until the whole
country is in a flame. it is true that the slaves whom the arab
merchants, or other men, have in their possession, never forsake their
master, as if they disliked their state in bondage; but then, when we
consider their position, what pleasure or advantage would they derive
by doing so? during the slave-hunts, when they are caught, their
country is devastated, their friends and relatives are either killed
or are scattered to the winds, and nothing but a wreck is left behind
them. again, they enter upon a life which is new to them, and is very
fascinating to their tastes; and as long as they do remain with such
kind masters as the arabs are, there is no necessity for our
commiserating them. they become elevated in their new state of
existence, and are better off than in their precarious homes, ever in
terror of being attacked. on the other hand, foreign slavery is a
different thing altogether. instead of living, as they in most part
do, willingly with the families of the arabs, men of a superior order,
and doing mild and congenial services, they get transported against
their will and inclinations to a foreign land, where, to live at all,
they must labour like beasts; and yet this is only half the mischief.
when a market for slavery is opened, when the draining poultice is
applied to africa's exterior, then the interior is drained of all its
working men. to supply the markets with those slaves becomes so
lucrative a means of gain that merchants would stick at no expedient
in endeavouring to secure them. the country, so full as we have seen
it of all the useful necessaries of life, able to supply our markets
and relieve our people by cheapening all commodities, is sacrificed
for the very minor consideration of improving cuba, arabia, persia,
and a few small islands in the indian ocean. on the contrary, slavery
has only to be suppressed entirely, and the country would soon yield
one hundredfold more than it ever has done before. the merchants
themselves at zanzibar are aware of this, for every hindi on the coast
with whom i ever spoke on the subject of slavery, seemed confident
that the true prosperity of africa would only commence with the
cessation of slavery. and they all say it would be far better for them
if slavery were put down altogether than allowed to remain as it is,
subject to limited restriction; for by this limitation many
inconveniences arise. those who were permitted to retain slaves, have
a great and distressing advantage over those who have not. the
restriction alluded to by our indian subjects at zanzibar is the
result of a most unfortunate treaty our government made with the
sultan of that country, wherein slavery was permitted to be carried on
within certain limits of latitude and longitude. the subjects of the
sultan by this means trade at a considerable pecuniary advantage over
our subjects, who, were they english instead of being indians, would
never rest satisfied until they were placed on an equal footing with
the arabs and wasuahili. they argue amongst themselves, and very
properly, that in consequence of these slave-hunts the country is kept
in such a state of commotion that no one thinks it worth his while to
make accumulations of property, and, consequently, the negroes now
only live for the day, and keep no granaries, never thinking of
exerting themselves to better their condition. without doubt it is
mainly owing to this unfortunate influence of slavery on african
society that we have been kept so long ignorant of the resources of
equatorial africa--a vast field of surprising fertility, which would
be of so much value to zanzibar and neighbouring india, were it only
properly developed. but i have been digressing, and must again return
to kasenge.

the village is very large and straggling, and consists of a collection
of haycock-looking huts, framed with wood or boughs, and covered over
with grass. kasanga's palace is the grandest one amongst them. this
monarch is a very amiable despot, and is liked in consequence. he
presented me with a goat and some grain, in return for which i gave a
_hongo_ (or tribute-fee) of three dhotis, two kitindis, and two
fundas, equal to twenty necklaces of large blue beads. the food of
these people consists chiefly of fish and fowls, both of which are
very abundant. all other articles of consumption, except a very little
grown on the spot, are imported from the mainland, and are, in
consequence, dear. the surrounding country, however, is very highly
cultivated--so much so, that it exports for the ujiji and other
distant markets. the africans have no religion, unless fetishism may
be considered such. they use charms to keep off the evil eye, and
believe in fortune-tellers. their church is called uganga, and the
parson mganga, the plural of which, priests, changes to waganga. the
prefixes, _u_, _m_, and _wa_, are used uniformly throughout this land
from zanzibar, to denote respectively, u, country or place, m, an
individual, and wa for plurality, as in tribe or people: thus, uganga,
mganga, waganga; or, unyamuezi, myamuezi, wanyamuezi. the composition
of this latter name is worthy of remark, as it differs from the
former, and therefore must tend to perplex. for instance, uganga is
composed of _u_, place, house, church, or country, and _ganga_, magic;
whilst unyamuezi is a triple word, divided into _u_ country--_ya_,
of--and _muezi_, moon. then, the language being euphonious, an
accidental n is thrown in between the _u_ and _y_ to tone down the
pronunciation.

13th.--the dhow came in this evening, bringing cows and goats, oil,
ghee, and other articles of consumption not found immediately in this
neighbourhood. she looked very graceful in contrast to the wretched
little canoes, and came moving slowly up the smooth waters of the
channel decked in her white sails, like a swan upon "a garden reach."
the next day hamed declared himself endeavouring to secure some men,
but none appeared. the day following he told me that the dhow was out
of repair, and must be mended. and the succeeding day he coupled
shifts and excuses with promises and hopes, so likely to be further
deferred, that my patience was fairly upset; and on the 17th, as
nothing was settled, we had a little tiff. i accused him of detaining
me in the hopes of getting powder, for as yet his armourer had not
succeeded in opening my chest, from which i knew he wanted some; at
any rate, i could see no other cause for his desiring my further stay
there, when even bombay had notified his displeasure at these
long-continued procrastinations. hamed, however, very quietly denied
the imputation, declaring that he desired nothing but what i might
frankly give, and continued his former kindnesses as though nothing
had happened. i then begged his counsel as to the best mode of
proceeding, upon which he advised my returning to ujiji, where an arab
merchant called said bin majid, with many men of the sort i required,
was reported to be arriving. in the meanwhile, during his absence at
uruwa, he would authorise his agent to make the dhow over to me
whenever i should come or send for it. it is needless to say how
easily, had my hands now been free to act, i might have availed myself
of this tempting opportunity of accompanying hamed on his journey to
uruwa, and have thus nearly connected this line from zanzibar with the
portuguese and dr livingstone's routes to loando on the western coast.
it would also have afforded a more perfect knowledge of the copper
mines at katata, a quantity of which comes to uruwa. hamed describes
the roads as easy to travel over, for the track lay across an
undulating country, intersected by many small insignificant streams,
running from north to south, which only contribute to fertilise the
land, and present no obstacles whatever. the line is cheap, and
affords provisions in abundance. it may appear odd that men should go
so far into the interior of africa to procure ivory, when undoubtedly
much is to be found at places not half so distant from zanzibar; but
the reason of it is simple. the nearer countries have become so
overstocked with beads and cloth, that ivory there has risen to so
great a price, it does not pay its transport. hence every succeeding
year finds the arabs penetrating farther inland. now, it will be seen
that the zanzibar arabs have reached the uttermost limits of their
tether; for uruwa is half-way across the continent, and in a few years
they must unite their labours with the people who come from loando on
the opposite coast.

as to obtain the dhow would, in our hampered state, have been of much
importance--for our cloth and supplies were all fast ebbing away--i
did not yet give in applying for it, and next day tried another device
to tempt this wily arab, by offering 500 dollars, or l100, if he would
defer his journey for a short time, and accompany us round the lake.
this was a large, and evidently an unexpected offer, and tried his
cupidity sorely; it produced a nervous fidgetiness, and he begged
leave to retire and con the matter over. next day, however, to my
great distress, he said he was sorry that he must decline, for his
business would not stand deferment, but declared himself willing to
sail with us on his return from uruwa, three months hence, if we could
only stay till then.[46]

feeling now satisfied that nothing would prevail upon hamed to let us
have the dhow, i wished to quit the island and return to ujiji, but
found my crew had taken french leave, and gone foraging on the
mainland, where, all grain being so much cheaper than at ujiji, they
wanted to procure a supply. i therefore employed the day in strolling
all over the island, and took bearings of some of the principal
features of the lake: of thembue, a distant promontory on the western
shore, south of this, which is occupied by a powerful sultan, and
contains a large population of very boisterous savages; of ukungue, on
the east shore; and of the islands of kivira and kabizia. i could also
see two other small islands lying amidst these larger ones, too small
for habitation. though my canoe arrived on the 20th, bad weather
prevented our leaving till the 22d, morning, completing twelve days at
kasenge. i now took leave of my generous host; and, bidding adieu to
kasenge, soon arrived and spent the day at kabizia, mourning in my
mind that i had induced captain burton to discharge ramji's slaves,
for bombay said they were all sailors, and would have handled the dhow
in first-rate style.

23d.--we crossed over to kivira, and pitched the tent in our former
harbour. next day we halted from stress of weather; and the following
day also remaining boisterous, we could not put to sea; but, to obtain
a better view of the lake, and watch the weather for choosing a
favourable time to cross, we changed khambi for a place farther up the
island.

24th.--we moved out two miles in the morning, but returned again from
fear of the weather, as the sailors could discern a small but very
alarming-looking cloud many miles distant, hanging on the top of one
of the hills, and there was a gentle breeze. in the evening, as the
portentous elements still frowned upon us, the wise crew surmised that
the _uganga_ (church) was angry at my endeavouring to carry across the
waters the goat which the sultan had given me, and which, they said,
ought never to have left the spot it was presented in alive; and
declared their intention of applying to the _mganga_ (priest) to
ascertain his opinion before venturing out again. as the goat had just
given a kid, and produced a good supply of milk, i was anxious to
bring her to ujiji for my sick companion, and told the sailors so; yet
still they persisted, and said they would run away rather than venture
on the water with the goat again. fearing detention, and guessing
their motive was only to obtain a share in the eating her, i killed
both kid and mother at once, and divided them amongst my party, taking
care that none of the crew received any of the flesh. at night we
sallied forth again, but soon returned from the same cause that
hindered us in the morning. and i did not spare the men's feelings who
had caused the death of my goat in the morning, now that their
superstitious fears concerning it, if they ever possessed any, were
proven to be without foundation.

27th.--we took our final departure from kivira in the morning, and
crossed the broad lake again in fourteen hours, two of them, as
before, being spent in pipes and rest. i have now measured the lake's
centre pretty satisfactorily by triangulation, by compass in
connection with astronomical observation, and twice by dead reckoning.
it is twenty-six miles broad at the place of crossing, which is its
narrowest central part. but, alas! that i should have omitted to bring
a sounding-line with me, and not have ascertained that highly
interesting feature--its depth. there is very little doubt in my mind
that its bed is very deep, owing to the trough-like formation of it,
and also because i have seen my crew haul up fishing-baskets, sunk in
the sea near to the shore, from very considerable depths, by long
ropes with trimmers attached. for the benefit of science, and as a
hint to future travellers, i may mention that, had i brought a lead, i
might, as if by accident, have dropped it in the sea when they were
resting--have tapped the bottom, and ascertained its depth--whilst the
superstitious crew would have only wondered in vain as to what i was
about.

28th.--we started up coast early, and at 10 a.m. put in amongst some
reeds opposite the luguvu river, as the wind, rain, and waves had very
nearly swamped the boat, and drenched us all from head to foot. i
pitched the tent in the canoe, to protect me from the storm, but it
only served to keep the wind from blowing on my wet clothes and
chilling me, for wave after wave washed over the gunwale, and kept me
and all my kit constantly drenched through. three lingering miserable
hours were passed in this fashion; for there was no place to land in,
and we could not venture forward. the sea abated in the afternoon, and
we gained mgiti khambi. after a day's halt, the weather being stormy,
and everything being wet and comfortless, we hailed with delight the
succeeding sunny day, and, making good our time, reached the old tree
on the right bank of the mouth of the ruche by 9 p.m.

31st.--we arrived at ujiji by breakfast-time, when i disclosed to
captain burton, then happily a little restored, the mortifying
intelligence of my failing to procure the dhow. this appeared doubly
distressing to him, for he had been led to expect it by khamis, whom i
passed at kabizia, and who had delivered hamed's letter, stating that
the dhow was at his service. hamed's manoeuvring with the dhow bears
much the appearance of one anxious to obtain the credit of generosity
without incurring the attendant inconvenience of its reality.
otherwise i cannot divine what good his procrastinations and the means
he took for keeping me near him so long could have been to him; for he
made no overtures to me whatever. bombay now thought, when it was too
late, that if i had offered to give him 500 dollars' worth of cloth,
landed at his house, he could not have resisted the offer. i give this
notice for the advantage of any future explorers on the lake. i could
not form a true estimate of the lake's average breadth, in consequence
of the numberless bays and promontories that diversify the regularity
of its coast-line; but i should say that from thirty to forty miles is
probably near the truth.

we had now no other resource left us but to proceed with the
investigation of the lake in common canoes; for we could not wait any
longer, as our supplies were fast on the wane. i was sorry for it, as
my companion was still suffering so severely, that anybody seeing him
attempt to go would have despaired of his ever returning. yet he could
not endure being left behind. travelling in canoes, as i could now
testify from my late experiences, is, without joke, a very trying
business to a sick man, even in the best weather; and here we were
still in the height of the monsoon. negotiations for the means of
carrying out our object (of proceeding to the north of the lake,
surveying it, and ascertaining whether hamed's story about a large
river running out of it was based upon a true foundation) were then
commenced, and kannina was applied to. he likewise, it appeared, had a
plan in view of carrying on some ivory transactions with the sultan of
uvira, governing a district at the northern end and western shore of
the lake, and agreed to take us there, and also show us the river in
question. it was settled that we should go in two canoes; captain
burton, with kannina, in a very large one, paddled by forty men at
once, and i in another considerably smaller--our party to pay all
expenses; and, in fact, to do kannina's business in consideration of
his protection. this we did do, and no more; for, after arriving at
uvira, nothing could induce him to take us to the river at the end of
the lake, although the remaining distance could have been accomplished
in about six hours' paddling. his reason, which he must have known
before, was, that the savages resident there, the warundi tribe, were
inimical to his people, the wajiji. this was a sore disappointment,
though not so great as it would have been had we not ascertained that
hamed's story was a mere fabrication. he had never been to the north
end of the lake, nor had he had the fight he described with the
natives; and, moreover, bombay assured both captain burton and myself
that hamed really meant that the river ran into the lake. had i
thought of it, i should then have changed the course of the marungu
river on my map, and made it run out of the lake, but i did not. next
the sultan's son, who visited us immediately on our arrival at uvira,
told us that the river, which is named rusizi, drained the high
mountains encircling our immediate north, and discharged its waters
into the lake. i should not have been satisfied with this
counter-statement alone, had i not ascended some neighbouring heights,
and observed the mountains increasing in size as they extended away to
the northward, and effectually closing in this _low_ lake, which is
not quite half the altitude of the surface-level of the general
interior plateau. although wrong in most respects, hamed was right
about the distance the lake's northern end lay from ujiji; for,
properly divided, it takes eight days, the time he specified, exactly.
on coming up the lake, we travelled the first half up the east coast,
then crossed over to the end of a long island called ubuari, made for
the western shore, and coasted up it to uvira. it would have amused
any one very much to have seen our two canoes racing together up the
lake. the naked savages were never tired of testing their respective
strengths. they would paddle away like so many black devils--dashing
up the water whenever they succeeded in coming near each other, and
delighting in drenching us with the spray. the greatest pleasure to
them, it appeared, was torturing others with impunity to themselves.
because the wazungu had clothes, and they had none, they cared not how
the water flew about; and the more they were asked to desist, the more
obstinately they persevered. for fear of misapprehension, i must state
that though these negroes go stark naked when cruising or working
during a shower of rain, they all possess a mantle or goat-skin, which
they sling over their shoulders, and strut about in when on shore and
the weather is fine.

it is a curious sight, when encamped on a showery day, to see every
man take off his skin, wrap it carefully up, and place it in his mzigo
or load, and stand, whilst his garment is thus comfortably disposed
of, cowering and trembling like a dog which has just emerged from a
cold pond.

now we have done with the tanganyika lake, i must say for it, that in
no part of africa hitherto visited by us had we seen such splendid
vegetation as covers its basin, from the mountain-tops to its shores.
to the northward, rain falls all the year round in frequent showers,
but on the southern half rain only falls during those six months when
the sun is in its southern declination. hence the northern half must
be richer than the southern; and the lake must owe its existence to
the constant inflows from the north.





                          chapter iii.

leave tanganyika--determine to visit the ukerewe lake, _alias_
victoria n'yanza--confusion about rivers running in and out--idea that
it is the source of the nile--arrangements for the
journey--difficulties--the march--nature of the country--formalities
at the meeting of caravans--a pagazi strike--a
sultana--incidents--pillars of granite.



on returning to ujiji after a rather protracted sojourn at uvira,
occasioned by kannina's not completing his work so quickly as had been
anticipated, we found our stock of beads and cloth, which had been
left in charge of the ras-cafila, sheikh said, and under the
protection of the beluches and our wanyamuezi porters, reduced to so
low an ebb that everybody felt anxious about our future movements. the
sheikh, however, i must add, on a prior occasion, very generously
proposed, in case we felt disposed to carry on the survey of the lake,
to return to the arab depot at kaze, and fetch some more _african
money_, to meet the necessary expenses. i wished to finish off the
navigation of the lake; but captain burton declared he would not, as
he had had enough of canoe-travelling, and thought our being short of
cloth, and out of leave, would be sufficient excuse for him. though
admiring so magnanimous a sacrifice on the part of this energetic
sheikh, it was voted, in consequence of my companion's failing health,
as well as from the delay it would occasion, that we should all return
at once to kaze, where we expected to meet our reserve supplies. this
once agreed upon, i then proposed that, after reaching kaze, we should
travel northwards to the lake described by the arabs to be both
broader and longer than the tanganyika, and which they call ukerewe,
after the island where their caravans go for ivory--in short, the
victoria n'yanza--for i was all the while burning to see it. to this
captain burton at first demurred. he said we had done enough, and he
would do no more; but finally gave way when i said, if you are not
well enough when we reach kaze i will go by myself, and you can employ
the time in taking notes from the travelled arabs of all the countries
round. this was agreed to at last by captain burton, as he said the
journey hitherto had been so uninteresting, a month with sheikh snay
would be very necessary to completing his book. delighted at this
announcement, i begged for leave to take sheikh said with me. captain
burton, however, wanted to keep him, as he was a great friend of all
the arabs, and could procure him news better than any one else. i
argued that the road was dangerous, and without him i thought i could
not succeed, as there was no one else to argue with the native chiefs,
and bring them to terms if they were headstrong. captain burton to
this appeal finally gave way, but said i must ask the sheikh myself,
as he was not bound to go on any other line than the one we were now
on. i did ask the sheikh, some time after, at usenye, and he said he
would see about it when we reached kaze. just as we were preparing to
leave ujiji, by great good fortune some supplies were brought to us by
an arab called mohinna, an old friend whom we formerly left at kaze,
and who had now followed us here to trade in ivory. had this timely
supply not reached us, it is difficult to conceive what would have
been our fate, left as we should have been with a large amount of
non-marketable property, and having numbers of people to feed, whilst
my companion was unable to move without the assistance of eight men to
carry him in a hammock, we being totally without the means of purchase
in the territory of one of the most inhospitable of all the tribes
with whom we have had connection.

this timely supply was one of the many strokes of good fortune which
befell us upon this journey, and for which we have so much reason to
be grateful. help had always reached us at the time when least we
expected it, but when we most required it. my health had been
improving ever since i first reached the lake, and enjoyed those
invigorating swims upon its surface, and revelled in the good living
afforded by the market at ujiji. the facilities of the place giving us
such a choice of food, our powers in the culinary art were tried to
their fullest extent. it would be difficult to tell what dishes we did
not make there. fish of many sorts done up in all the fashions of the
day--meat and fowl in every form--vegetable soups, and dishes of
numberless varieties--fruit-preserves, custards, custard-puddings, and
jellies--and last, but not least, buttered crumpets and
cheese,--formed as fine a spread as was ever set before a king.

but sometimes we came to grief when our supply of milk was, on the
most foolish pretexts, stopped by kannina, who was the only
cow-proprietor in the neighbourhood. at one time he took offence
because we turned his importunate wives out of the house, in mistake
for common beggars. on another occasion, when i showed him a cheese of
our manufacture, and begged he would allow me to instruct his people
in the art of making them, he took fright, declared that the cheese
was something supernatural, and that it could never have been made by
any ordinary artifice. moreover, if his people were shown the way to
do it one hundred times, they would never be able to comprehend it. he
further showed his alarm by forbidding us any more milk, lest, by our
tampering with it, we should bewitch his cows and make them all run
dry. the cattle this milk was taken from are of a uniform red colour,
like our devonshire breed; but they attain a very great height and
size, and have horns of the most stupendous dimensions.

a year's acclimatisation had by this time produced a wonderful effect
on all the party; so that now, with our fresh supplies, most of us
marched away from ujiji in better condition than we had enjoyed since
leaving the coast. the weather was very fine, the rainy season having
ceased on the 15th may; we marched rapidly across the eastern horn of
the mountains back to the ferry on the malagarazi, but by a more
northernly route than the one by which we came.

we reached this river in early june, and found its appearance very
different from what it was on our former visit, at the beginning of
the monsoon. then its waters were contained within its banks, of no
considerable width; but now, although the rains had ceased here long
ago, the river had not only overflowed its banks, but had submerged
nearly all the valley in which it lies to the extent at least of a
mile or more. the rains about 5o south latitude had just lasted out
the six months during which the sun was in the south; and now, as the
sun had gone north, the rains had gone there also. this was a very
important fact, by which the rise of the nile on the other side of the
axis of this mountain-group might be determined, proving, as it does,
that whilst rain falls most wherever the sun is vertical, it is
greatly augmented on the equatorial regions by these mountains, where
also, as our maps show, is the rainy zone of the world.

after crossing the river, we hurried along by a more southernly and
straighter road than we formerly came by, and reached kaze towards the
latter end of june. here sheikh snay received us with his usual
genuine hospitality, arranged a house especially for our use, and with
him we again established our headquarters. this man, when we were
formerly detained here to form our second caravan on our journey
westwards, housed us, and carefully attended to our wants. he took
charge of our kit, provided us with porters, and finally became our
agent. living with him, surrounded by an arab community, felt like
living in a civilised land; for the arab's manners and society are as
pleasant and respectable as can be found in any oriental family. snay
had travelled as much as, or more than, any person in this land; and
from being a shrewd and intelligent inquirer, knew everybody and
everything. it was from his mouth, on our former visit to kaze, that i
first heard of the n'yanza, or, as he called it, the ukerewe sea; and
then, too, i first proposed that we should go to it instead of
journeying westward to the smaller waters of ujiji. he had travelled
up its western flank to kibuga, the capital of the kingdom of uganda,
and had in his employ men who had lived and traded in usoga. snay,
narrating his own experiences, said to me, "i was once three years
absent on a visit to king sunna, at his capital (kibuga) in the uganda
kingdom, occupied by a tribe called waganda. starting from kaze, it
took me thirty-five marches to reach kitangule (bearing n.n.w.), and
twenty more marches going northwards, with the morning sun a little on
my right face (probably north by east), to arrive at kibuga. the only
people that gave me any trouble on the way are the wasui, situate at
the beginning of the karague kingdom; but that was only trifling, as
they did not fight, and lasted but three or four marches. the karague
kingdom (a mountainous tract of land, containing several high spurs of
hill, the eastern buttresses of these lunae montes, and washed on the
flanks by the ukerewe sea) is bounded on the north by the kitangule
river, beyond which the wanyoro territory (crescent shape) lies, with
the horns directed eastwards. amidst them, situate in the concave or
lake side, are the waganda, to whose capital i went. anybody wishing
to see the northern boundary of the lake should go to kibuga, take
good presents, and make friends with the reigning monarch; and, with
his assistance, buy or construct boats on the shore of the lake, which
is about five marches east of his capital.[47] north, beyond the
waganda, the wanyoro are again met with; and there quarrels and wars
were so rife, from a jealousy existing among them and the waganda,
that had these people known of a northern boundary, i still might not
have heard of it. on crossing the kitangule river, i found it
emanating from urundi (a district in the mountains of the moon), and
flowing north-easterly. the breadth of the river is very great--i
should imagine, some five to six hundred yards--and it contains much
water, overflowing as the malagarazi does after rains. there are also
numerous other little streams on the way to kibuga, but none so great
as the katonga river. this, like the rest, comes from the west, and
flows towards the lake. it has a breadth of two thousand yards, is
very deep when full, but sinks and is very sluggish in the dry season,
when water-lilies and rushes overspread its surface, and the
musquitoes are very annoying. the cowrie-shell, brought from the
zanzibar coast, is the common currency amongst the more northern
tribes; but they are not worth the merchant's while to carry, as beads
and brass (not cloth, for they are essentially a bead-wearing and
naked people) are eagerly sought for and taken in exchange. large
sailing-craft, capable of containing forty or fifty men, and manned
and navigated after the fashion of ocean mariners, are reported by the
natives to frequent the lake (meaning the nile at gondokoro). we arabs
believe in this report, as everybody tells the same story; but don't
know how it happens to be so, unless it is open to the sea. the
kitangule river is crossed in good-sized wooden canoes; but the
katonga river can only be passed in the dry season, when men walk over
it on the lily leaves: cattle, too, are then passed across in certain
open spaces, guided by a long string, which is attached to the
animals' heads."

other arab and wasuahili merchants have corroborated snay's statement,
as also a hindi merchant, called musa, whom i especially mention, as i
consider him a very valuable informant--not only from the
straightforward way he had of telling his story, but also because we
could converse with one another direct, and so obviate any chance of
errors. after describing his route to the north in minute detail,
stage by stage, with great precision, which was to the same effect as
all the other accounts, he told me of a third large river to the
northward of the line, beyond uganda; this he spoke of as much larger
than the katonga, and generally called the usoga river, because it
waters that district. although he had recently visited kibuga, and had
lived with sultan mtesa, the present reigning monarch in place of
sunna, who died since snay was there, he had no positive or definite
idea of the physical features of any of the country beyond the point
which he had reached; but he produced a negro slave who had been to
usoga, and had seen the river in question. this man called the river
kivira, and described it as being much broader, deeper, and stronger
in its current than either the katonga or kitangule river; that it
came from the lake, and that it intersected stony hilly ground on its
passage to the north-west.

this river kivira, i now believe (although i must confess i did not
until i made snay alter his original statement about the direction of
its flow, and so proved he meant this for his jub), is the nile
itself. on a subsequent occasion, when talking to a very respectable
suahili merchant, by name sheikh abdullah bin nasib, about the
n'yanza, he corroborated the story about the mariners, who are said to
keep logs and use sextants, and mentioned that he had heard of the
kidi and bari people living on the kivira river. now, the bari people
mentioned by him are evidently those who have long since been known to
us as a tribe living on the nile in latitude 5o north and longitude
32o east, and described by the different egyptian expeditions sent up
the nile to discover its source. m. ferdinand werne (says dr beke) has
published an account of the second expedition's proceedings, in which
he took part; and which, it appears, succeeded in getting farther up
the river than either of the others. "the author states that,
according to lacono, king of bari, the course of the river continues
thence southwards a distance of thirty days' journey." this, by dr
beke's computation, places the source of the nile just where i have
since discovered the n'yanza's southern extremity to be--in the second
degree south latitude, lying in the unyamuezi country.[48]

here we see how singularly all the different informers' statements
blend together in substantiating my opinion that the n'yanza is the
great reservoir or fountainhead of that mighty stream that floated
father moses on his first adventurous sail--the nile. it must appear
marvellous to the english reader how it happened that these traders
obtained so much and such good information to the northward of the
equator, and especially of the white nile traders. the reasons are
these:--for several years these arabs have not only traded with
karague, uganda, and usoga, but they have had trading-stations in
uddu-uganda and in karague. the uganda station has since been broken
up by order of the king, as the arabs were interfering too much with
his subjects. in karague, on the contrary, they still have
establishments; and as they cannot go into unyoro themselves, they
have induced the wahaiya and waziwa to bring them ivory from that
country and from kidi, in exchange for which they give beads. these
zanzibar merchants are very inquiring men, and have learnt a great
deal from this source. far more, however, they have learned from the
king of karague, who is much respected by all the surrounding kings,
and is continually exchanging presents and news with them. the king of
unyoro, for instance, whose territory extends to madi, once sent him a
present of beads and coral ornaments which must have come up the nile,
for at the same time the sailing-vessels on the nile were heard of,
and ornaments of that nature were never brought into the country from
the zanzibar side. omitted in these accounts was a statement of musa's
i did not believe at first concerning the rise of the nile, which was
this: the natives had told him when the n'yanza (nile) rose, it tore
up and floated away islands. further, abdullah told me of a
wonderfully high and steep mountain beyond karague--doubtless the
mfumbiro--being constantly covered with clouds; and i heard from him
of a salt lake--doubtless the little luta nzige--which had some
connection with the n'yanza. these details were, however, so obscurely
given, i feared to place them on my map at that time.

i began the formation of the new caravan for exploring northern
unyamuezi immediately after our arrival, but found it difficult to do
things hurriedly. there was only one man then at unyanyembe who knew
the coast language, and would consent to act as my kirangozi;[49] and
as he had come all the way from ujiji with us, he required a few days
to arrange things at his home, in a village some distance off. whilst
he was absent the arabs paid us daily visits, and gave many useful
hints about the journey in prospect. one hint must especially be
regarded, which was, to take care, on arrival at the lake, that i did
not enter the village of a certain sultan called mahaya, to whose
district, muanza, at the southern extremity of the lake, they directed
me to go. this precautionary warning was advanced in consequence of a
trick the sultan had played an arab, who, after visiting him in a
friendly way, was forcibly detained until he paid a ransom; an unjust
measure, which the arabs pointedly advert to as destructive to
commercial interests. further, the arabs had learnt from travellers
just arrived from usukuma that the whole route leading to the n'yanza
was in a state of commotion, caused by civil wars, and therefore
advised me to go as strongly armed as possible.

to lose no time whilst the kirangozi was away--for i had a long
business to do in a very short space--i intimated to sheikh said and
the beluch guard my intention of taking them with me to the lake, and
ordered them to prepare for the journey by a certain date. said
demurred, saying he would give a definite answer about accompanying me
before the time of starting, but subsequently refused (i hear, as one
reason), because he did not consider me his chief.[50] i urged that it
was as much his duty as mine to go there; and said that unless he
changed his present resolution, i should certainly recommend the
government not to pay the gratuity which the consul had promised him
on condition that he worked entirely to our satisfaction, in assisting
the expedition to carry out the government's plans.

the jemadar of the beluch guard, on seeing the sheikh hold back, at
first raised objections, and then began to bargain. he fixed a pay of
one gora or fifteen cloths per man, as the only condition on which i
should get their services; for they all declared that they had not
only been to ujiji, the place appointed by sultan majid and their
chief before leaving zanzibar, but that they had overstayed the time
agreed upon for them to be absent on these travels--namely, six
months. i acceded to this exorbitant demand, considering the value of
time, as the dry season had now set in, and the arabs at this period
cease travelling to zanzibar, from fear of being caught by droughts in
the deserts between this place and the east coast range, where, if the
ponds and puddles dry up, there is so little water in the wells that
travelling becomes precarious.

further, i had not only to go through a much wilder country than we
had travelled in before, two and a half degrees off, to discover and
bring back full particulars of the n'yanza, but had to purchase cattle
sufficient for presents, and food for the whole journey down to the
coast, within the limited period of six weeks. ramji's slaves all came
back to us here, and begged we would take them into our service again.
i wanted to do so, as snay not only strongly advised me to have as
strong an escort as possible, but thought that their knowledge of
treating with native chiefs would be of the greatest value to me.
captain burton, however, would not listen to my request, as he
insisted they would only prove of more expense than profit to the
expedition; but instead, he employed them himself, after i had gone,
in repairing our damaged property, and in laying in supplies for our
future journey home. i regretted the loss of these men the more, as
they all so warmly volunteered to go with me. the arab depot now came
into play to satisfy this sudden and unexpected call upon our store of
cloths. there were ten beluches fit for service, and for each of them
a gora was bought at the depot, at a valuation of ten dollars each, or
a hundred the lot. in addition to this they received an advance of
fifteen maunds of white beads in lieu of rations--a rate of 1 lb. per
man per day for six weeks. the kirangozi now returned with many
excuses to escape the undertaking of guiding me to the lake. he
declared that all the roads were rendered impassable by wars, and that
it was impossible for him to undertake the responsibility of escorting
me in so dangerous a country. after a good deal of bothering and
persuading he at length acceded, and brought fifteen pagazis or
porters from his own and some neighbouring villages. to each of these
i gave five cloths as hire, and all appeared ready; but not so.
bombay's seedi nature came over him, and he would not move a yard
unless i gave him a month's wages in cloth upon the spot. i thought
his demand an imposition, for he had just been given a cloth. his
wages were originally fixed at five dollars a-month, to accumulate at
zanzibar until our return there; but he was to receive daily rations
the same as all the other men, with an occasional loin-cloth covering
whenever his shukka might wear out. all these strikes with the
beluches and bombay for cloth were in consequence of their having
bought some slaves, whose whims and tastes they could not satisfy
without our aid; and they knew these men would very soon desert them
unless they received occasionally alluring presents to make them
contented. but finessing is a kind of itch with all orientals, as
gambling is with those who are addicted to it; and they would tell any
lie rather than gain their object easily by the simple truth, on the
old principle that "stolen things are sweetest." had bombay only
opened his heart, the matter would have been settled at once, for his
motives were of a superior order. he had bought, to be his adopted
brother, a slave of the wahha tribe, a tall, athletic, fine-looking
man, whose figure was of such excellent proportions that he would have
been remarkable in any society; and it was for this youth, and not
himself, he had made so much fuss and used so many devices to obtain
the cloths. indeed, he is a very singular character, not caring one
bit about himself, how he dressed or what he ate; ever contented, and
doing everybody's work in preference to his own, and of such exemplary
honesty, he stands a solitary marvel in the land: he would do no wrong
to benefit himself--to please anybody else there is nothing he would
stick at. i now gave him five cloths at his request, to be eventually
deducted from his pay. half of them he gave to a slave called mabruki,
who had been procured by him for leading captain burton's donkey, but
who had, in consequence of bad behaviour, reverted to my service. this
man he also designated "brother," and was very warmly attached to,
though mabruki had no qualifications worthy of attracting any one's
affections to him. he was a sulky, dogged, pudding-headed brute, very
ugly, but very vain; he always maintained a respectable appearance, to
cloak his disrespectful manners. the remainder was expended in
loin-cloths, some spears, and a fez (red turkish cap), the wearing of
which he shared by turns with his purchased brother, and a little
slave-child whom he had also purchased and employed in looking after
the general wardrobe, and in cooking his porridge dinner, or fetching
water and gathering sticks. on the line of march the little urchin
carried bombay's sleeping-hide and water-gourd.

before my departure from kaze, captain burton wrote the royal
geographical society to the following effect:--"i have the honour to
transmit a copy of a field-book with a map, by captain speke. captain
speke has volunteered to visit the ukerewe lake, of which the arabs
give grand accounts."

9th july 1858.--the caravan, consisting of one kirangozi, twenty
pagazis, ten beluches as guard, bombay, mabruki, and gaetano,
escorting a kit sufficient for six weeks, left kaze to form camp at
noon. the beluches were all armed with their own guns, save one, who
carried one of captain burton's double rifles, an eight-bore by w.
richards.[51] i took with me for sporting purposes, as well as for the
defence of the expedition, one large five-bore elephant-gun, also lent
by captain burton; and of my own, one two-grooved four-gauge single
rifle, one polygrooved twenty-gauge double, and one double smooth
twelve-bore, all by john blissett of high holborn. the village they
selected to form up in was three miles distant on the northern
extremity of this, the unyanyembe district.

i commenced the journey myself at 6 p.m., as soon as the two donkeys i
took with me to ride were caught and saddled. it was a dreary
beginning. the escort of beluches who accompanied me had throughout
the former journeys been in great disgrace, and were in consequence
all sullen in their manner, and walked with heavy gait and downcast
countenances, looking very much as if they considered they had sold
themselves when striking such a heavy bargain with us, for they
evidently saw nothing before them but drudgery and a continuance of
past hardships. the nature of the track increased the general gloom;
it lay through fields of jowari (holcus) across the plain of
unyanyembe. in the shadow of night, the stalks, awkwardly lying across
the path, tripped up the traveller at every step; and whilst his
hands, extended to the front, were grasping at darkness to preserve
his equilibrium, the heavy bowing ears, ripe and ready to drop, would
bang against his eyes. further, the heavy sandy soil aided not a
little in ruffling the temper; but it was soon over, though all our
mortification did not here cease. the pagazis sent forward had
deposited their loads and retired home to indulge, it is suspected, in
those potations deep of the universal pombe (african small-beer) that
always precede a journey, hunt, or other adventure--without leaving a
word to explain the reason of their going, or even the time which they
purposed being absent.

10th july.--the absence of the pagazis caused a halt, for none of them
appeared again until after dark. the beluches, gloomy, dejected,
discontented, and ever grumbling, form as disagreeable a party as it
was ever the unfortunate lot of any man to command.

11th.--we started on the journey northwards at 7 a.m., and, soon
clearing the cultivated plain, bade adieu to unyanyembe. the track
passed down a broad valley with a gentle declination, which was full
of tall but slender forest-trees, and was lined on either side by low
hills. we passed one dry nullah, the gombe, which drains the regions
westward into the malagarazi river, some pools of water, and also two
wasukuma caravans, one of ivory destined for the coast, and the other
conveying cattle to the unyanyembe markets. though the country through
which we passed was wild and uninhabited, we saw no game but a troop
of zebras, which were so wild that i could not get near them. after
walking fifteen miles, we arrived at the district of ulekampuri, and
entered a village, where i took up my quarters in a negro's hut. my
servants and porters did the best they could by pigging with the
cattle, or lying in the shade under the eaves of the huts.

up to this point the villages, as is the case in all central
unyamuezi, are built on the most luxurious principles. they form a
large hollow square, the walls of which are the huts, ranged on all
sides of it in a sort of street consisting of two walls, the breadth
of an ordinary room, which is partitioned off to a convenient size by
interior walls of the same earth-construction as the exterior ones, or
as our sepoys' lines are made in india. the roof is flat, and serves
as a store-place for keeping sticks to burn, drying grain, pumpkins,
mushrooms, or any vegetables they may have. most of these compartments
contain the families of the villagers, together with their poultry,
brewing utensils, cooking apparatus, stores of grain, and anything
they possess. the remainder contain their flocks and herds,
principally goats and cows, for sheep do not breed well in the
country, and their flesh is not much approved of by the people. what
few sheep there are appear to be an offshoot from the persian stock.
they have a very scraggy appearance, and show but the slightest signs
of the fat-rumped proportions of their ancestors. the cows, unlike the
noble tanganyika ones, are small and short-horned, and are of a
variety of colours. they carry a hump like the brahminy bull, but give
very little milk. in front of nearly every house you see large slabs
of granite, the stones on which the jowari is ground by women, who,
kneeling before them, rub the grain down to flour with a smaller
stone, which they hold with both hands at once. thus rubbing and
grinding away, swaying monotonously to and fro, they cheer the time by
singing and droning in cadence to the motion of their bodies.

the country to the east and north-east of this village is said to be
thinly peopled, but, as usual, the clans are much intermixed, the two
principal being wakimbu and wasagari. i here engaged a second guide or
leader for five shukkas (small loin-cloths) merikani, as a second war,
different from the one we had heard of at kaze, had broken out exactly
on the road i was pursuing, and rendered my first leader's experience
of no avail. the evening was spent by the porters in dancing, and
singing a song which had been evidently composed for the occasion, as
it embraced everybody's name connected with the caravan, but more
especially mzungu (the wise or white man), and ended with the
prevailing word amongst these curly-headed bipeds, "grub, grub, grub!"
it is wonderful to see how long they will, after a long fatiguing
march, keep up these festivities, singing the same song over and over
again, and dancing and stamping, with their legs and arms flying about
like the wings of a semaphore, as they move slowly round and round in
the same circle and on the same ground; their heads and bodies lolling
to and fro in harmony with the rest of the dance, which is always kept
at more even measure when, as on this occasion, there were some
village drums beating the measure they were wont to move by.

12th.--the caravan got under way by 6 a.m., and we marched thirteen
miles to a village in the southern extremity of the unyambewa
district. fortunately tempers, like butterflies, soon change state.
the great distractor time, together with the advantage of distance,
has produced such a salutary effect on the beluches' minds, that this
morning's start was accomplished to the merry peals of some native
homely ditty, and all moved briskly forward. this was the more
cheering to me because it was the first occasion of their having shown
such signs of good feeling as singing in chorus on the line of march.
the first five miles lay over flattish ground, winding amongst low
straggling hills of the same formation as the whole surface of the
unyamuezi country, which is diversified with small hills composed of
granite outcrops. as we proceeded, the country opened into an
extensive plain, covered, as we found it at first, with rich
cultivation, and then succeeded by a slender tree-forest, amongst
which we espied some antelopes, all very wary and difficult of
approach.

at the ninth mile was a pond of sweet water, the greatest luxury in
the desert. here i ordered a halt for half an hour, and made a hearty
breakfast on cold meat, potted tanganyika shrimps, rozelle jelly, with
other delicacies, and coffee. the latter article was bought from the
kaze merchants. towards the close of the journey a laughable scene
took place between an ivory caravan of wasukuma and my own.[52] on
nearing each other, the two kirangozis or leaders slowly advanced,
marching in front of the single-file order in which caravans worm
along these twisting narrow tracks, with heads awry, and eyes
steadfastly fixed on one another, and with their bodies held
motionless and strictly poised, like rams preparing for a fight,
rushed in with their heads down, and butted continuously till one gave
way. the rest of the caravan then broke up their order of march, and
commenced a general melee. in my ignorance--for it was the first time
i had seen such a scrimmage--i hastened to the front with my knobbed
stick, and began reflecting where i could make best use of it in
dividing the combatants, and should no doubt have laid on if i only
could have distinguished friend from foe; but both parties, being
black, were so alike, that i hesitated until they stopped to laugh at
my excited state, and assured me that it was only the enactment of a
common custom in the country when two strange caravan-leaders meet,
and each doubts who should take the supremacy in choice of side. in
two minutes more the antagonists broke into broad laughter, and each
went his way.

the villages about here are numerous, and the country, after passing
the forest, is highly cultivated, and affords plenty of provisions;
but unfortunately as yet the white beads which i have brought have no
value with the natives, and i cannot buy those little luxuries, eggs,
butter, and milk, which have such a powerful influence in making one's
victuals good and palatable; whereas there is such a rage for coloured
beads, that if i had brought some i might purchase anything.

13th.--the caravan started at 6.30 a.m., and after travelling eight
miles over an open, waving, well-cultivated country, stopped at the
last village in unyambewa. the early morning before starting was
wasted by the pagazis "striking" for more cloth, and refusing to move
unless i complied with their demand. i peremptorily refused, and they
then tried to wheedle me out of beads. in demanding cloth, they
pretended that they were suffering from the chilling cold of night--a
pretence too absurd to merit even a civil reply. i then explained to
my head men that i would rather anything happened than listen to such
imposture as this; for did the men once succeed by tricks of this
sort, there would never be an end to their trying it on, and it would
ultimately prove highly injurious to future travellers, especially to
merchants. on the route we had nothing to divert attention, save a
single wasukuma caravan proceeding southwards to unyanyembe. a sultana
called ungugu governs this district. she is the first and only female
that we have seen in this position, though she succeeded to it after
the custom of the country. i imagine she must have had a worthless
husband, since every sultan can have as many wives as he pleases, and
the whole could never have been barren. i rallied the porters for
pulling up after so short a march, but could not induce them to go on.
they declared that forests of such vast extent lay on ahead that it
would be quite impossible to cross them before the night set in. in
the evening i had a second cause for being vexed at this loss of time,
when every mile and hour was of so much importance; for by our halt
the sultana got news of my arrival, and sent a messenger to request
the pleasure of my company at her house on the morrow. in vain i
pleaded for permission to go and see her that moment, or to do so on
my return from the n'yanza; her envoy replied that the day was so far
spent i could not arrive at her abode till after dark, and she would
not have the pleasure of seeing me sufficiently well. he therefore
begged i would attend to the letter of her request, and not fail to
visit her in the morning.

the lazy pagazis, smelling flesh, also aided the deputy in his
endeavours to detain me, by saying that they could not oppose her
majesty's will, lest at any future time, when they might want again to
pass that way, she should take her revenge upon them. though this
might seem a very reasonable excuse, i doubt much, if their interests
had lain the opposite way, whether they would have been so cautious.
however, it was not difficult to detect their motives for bringing
forward such an urgent reason against me, as it is a custom in this
country that every wealthy traveller or merchant shall pay a
passport-fee, according to his means, to the sultan of the country he
travels through, who in return gives a cow or goat as a mark of amity,
and this is always shared amongst the whole caravan.

14th.--the sultana's house was reported to be near, so i thought to
expedite the matter by visiting her in person, and thus perhaps gain
an afternoon's march: otherwise to have sent the jemadar with a
present would have been sufficient, for these creatures are pure
mammonists. vain hope, trying to do anything in a hurry in negroland!
i started early in the morning, unfortified within, and escorted by
two beluches, the kirangozi, three porters, bombay, and mabruki. the
necessary presents were also taken: these consisted of one
barsati,[53] one dhoti merikani,[54] and one shukka kiniki.[55] this
last article was to be kept in reserve, to throw in at last and close
with, as further demands beyond what is given are invariably made.
after walking six miles over a well-cultivated plain, i felt anxious
to know what they meant by "near," and was told, as usual, that the
house was close at hand. distrustful, but anxious to complete the
business as speedily as possible (for to succeed in africa one must do
everything one's self), i followed the envoy across one of the waves
that diversify the face of the country, descended into a
well-cultivated trough-like depression, and mounted a second wave six
miles farther on.

here at last, by dint of perseverance, we had the satisfaction of
seeing the palisadoed royal abode. we entered it by an aperture in the
tall slender stakes which surround the dwellings and constitute the
palisadoing, and after following up a passage constructed of the same
material as the outer fence, we turned suddenly into a yard full of
cows--a substitute for an anteroom. arrived there, the negroes at once
commenced beating a couple of large drums, half as tall as themselves,
made something like a beer-barrel, covered on the top with a cow-skin
stretched tightly over, by way of a drum-head. this drumming was an
announcement of our arrival, intended as a mark of regal respect.

for ten minutes we were kept in suspense, my eyes the while resting
upon the milk-pots which were being filled at mid-day, but i could not
get a drop. at the expiration of that time a body of slaves came
rushing in, and hastily desired us to follow them. they led us down
the passage by which we entered, and then turned up another one
similarly constructed, which brought us into the centre of the
sultana's establishment--a small court, in which the common negro
mushroom huts, with ample eaves, afforded us grateful shelter from the
blazing sun. a cow-skin was now spread, and a wooden stool set for me,
that i might assume a better state than my suite, who were squatted in
a circle around me. with the usual precaution of african nobles, the
lady's-maid was first sent to introduce herself--an ugly halting
creature, very dirtily garbed, but possessing a smiling contented
face. her kindly mien induced me, starving and thirsty as i was after
my twelve miles' walk, to ask for eggs and milk--great luxuries,
considering how long i had been deprived of them. they were soon
procured, and devoured with a voracity that must have astonished the
bystanders.

the maid, now satisfied there was nothing to fear, whether from ghost,
goblin, or white face, retired and brought her mistress, a short
stumpy old dame, who had seen at least some sixty summers. her nose
was short, squat, and flabby at the end, and her eyes were bald of
brows or lashes; but still she retained great energy of manner, and
was blessed with an ever-smiling face. the dress she wore consisted of
an old barsati, presented by some arab merchant, and was if anything
dirtier than her maid's attire. the large joints of all her fingers
were bound up with small copper wire, her legs staggered under an
immense accumulation of anklets made of brass wire wound round
elephant's tail or zebra's hair; her arms were decorated with huge
solid brass rings, and from other thin brass wire bracelets depended a
great assortment of wooden, brazen, horn, and ivory ornaments, cut in
every shape of talismanic peculiarity.

squatting by my side, the sultana at once shook hands. her nimble
fingers first manipulated my shoes (the first point of notice in these
barefooted climes), then my overalls, then my waistcoat, more
particularly the buttons, and then my coat--this latter article being
so much admired, that she wished i would present it to her, to wear
upon her own fair person. next my hands and fingers were mumbled, and
declared to be as soft as a child's, and my hair was likened to a
lion's mane. "where is he going?" was the all-important query. this,
without my understanding, was readily answered by a dozen voices,
thus: "he is going to the lake, to barter his cloth for large
hippopotami teeth." satisfied with this plausible story, she retired
into privacy, and my slave, taking the hint, soon followed with the
hongo (present or tax), duly presented it, and begged permission in my
name to depart. but as she had always given a bullock to the arabs who
visited her, i also must accept one from her, though she could not
realise the fact that so scurvy a present as mine could be intended
for her, whose pretensions were in no way inferior to those of the
unyanyembe sultan. an arab could not have offered less, and this was a
rich mzungu!

misfortunes here commenced anew: the bullock she was desirous of
giving was out grazing, and could not be caught until the evening,
when all the cattle are driven in together. further, she could not
afford to lose so interesting a personage as her guest, and
volunteered to give me a shakedown for the night. i begged she would
consider my position--the absolute necessity for my hurrying--and not
insist on my acceptance of the bullock, or be offended by my refusing
her kind offer to remain there, but permit our immediate departure.
she replied that the word had gone forth, so the animal must be given;
and if i still persisted in going, at any rate three porters could
remain behind, and drive it on afterwards. to this i reluctantly
consented, and only on the kirangozi's promise to march the following
morning. then, with the usual farewell salutation, "kuahere, mzungu,"
from my pertinacious hostess, i was not sorry to retrace my steps, a
good five hours' walk. we re-entered camp at 7.20 p.m., which is long
after dark in regions so near to the equator. all palaces here are
like all the common villages beyond unyamuezi proper, and are usually
constructed on the same principle as this one. they consist of a
number of mushroom-shaped grass huts, surrounded by a tall slender
palisading, and having streets or passages of the same wooden
construction, some winding, some straight, and others crosswise, with
outlets at certain distances leading into the different courts, each
court usually containing five or six huts partitioned off with poles
as the streets are. these courts serve for dividing the different
families, uncles and cousins occupying some, whilst slaves and their
relatives live in others. besides this they have their cattle-yards.
if the site of the village be on moist or soft ground, it is usual, in
addition to the palisading, to have it further fortified by a moat or
evergreen fence.

15th.--we left unyambewa at 7 a.m., and reached a village in the
ibanda district, having marched seven miles over flat ground, growing
fine crops in some places, with the remainder covered by the usual
slender forest-trees. the road was very good and regular. in the
afternoon the three porters arrived with the sultana's bullock, and
were attended by her nephew and managing man, and by some of her
slaves as drivers. the nephew asked first for more presents in her
name; as this was refused, he requested something for the drivers. i
gave them a cloth, and he then pleaded for himself, as he had
sacrificed so much time and trouble for me. i satisfied him with one
fundo of beads (a bunch of beads sufficient to form ten khetes or
necklaces), and we parted: a full khete is a string of beads double
the length of the fore-arm, or sufficiently long to encircle the neck
twice. the beluches, finding that nothing but the coarsest grains were
obtainable with the white beads they had received, petitioned for and
obtained a shukka, but under the proviso of their always assisting me
to urge on the lazy porters. this they not only agreed to do, but also
declared themselves willing to execute any orders i might give them:
they looked upon me as their ma, bap (mother and father, a hindostani
expression, significant of everything, or entire dependence on one as
a son on his parents), and considered my interests their interests.

16th.--we started at 6 a.m., and travelled eleven miles to ukamba, a
village in the district of msalala, which is held by a tribe called
wamanda. the first four miles lay over the cultivated plain of ibanda,
till we arrived at the foot of a ridge of hills, which, gradually
closing from the right, intersects the road, and runs into a hilly
country extending round the western side of the aforesaid plain. we
now crossed the range, and descended into a country more closely
studded with the same description of small hills, but highly
cultivated in the valleys and plains that separate them. about twelve
miles to the eastward of ukamba live a tribe called wasongo, and to
the west, at twenty miles' distance, are the waquanda. to-day was
fully verified the absolute futility of endeavouring to march against
time in these wild countries.

the lazy pagazis finding themselves now, as it were, in clover, a
country full of all the things they love, would not stir one step
after 11 a.m. were time of no consequence, and coloured beads in
store, such travelling as this would indeed be pleasant. for the
country here, so different from the ujiji line, affords not only
delightful food for the eyes, but abounds in flesh, milk, eggs, and
vegetables in every variety. the son of the msene sultan, who lives
between unyanyembe and ujiji, and became great friends with us when
travelling there, paid me a visit to-day. he caught me at work with my
diary and instruments, and being struck with veneration at the sight
of my twirling compass and literary pursuits, thought me a magician,
and begged that i would cast his horoscope, divine the probable extent
of his father's life, ascertain if there would be any wars, and
describe the weather, the prospects of harvest, and what future state
the country would lapse into. the shrewd bombay replied, to save me
trouble, that so great a matter required more days of contemplation
than i could afford to give. provisions were very dear when purchased
with white beads, for they were not the fashion, and the people were
indifferent to them. i paid him one loin-cloth for four fowls and nine
eggs, though, had i had coloured beads, i might have purchased one hen
per khete (or necklace). had this been a cloth-wearing instead of a
bead-decorating nation, i should have obtained forty fowls for one
shukka (or loin-cloth), that being the equivalent value with beads,
equal, according to zanzibar money, to one dollar. it is always
foolish to travel without an assortment of beads, in consequence of
the tastes of the different tribes varying so much; and it is more
economical in the long-run to purchase high-priced than low-priced
beads when making up the caravan at zanzibar, for every little trader
buys the cheaper sorts, stocks the country with them, and thus makes
them common.

17th.--this day, like all the preceding ones, is delightful, and
worthy of drawing forth an exclamation, like the indian griff's, of
"what a fine day this is again!" we started at 7 a.m., and travelled
thirteen miles, with fine bracing air, so cold in the morning that my
fingers tingled with it. we were obliged here to diverge from the
proper road _via_ sarenge, to avoid a civil war--the one before
alluded to, and to escape which i had engaged the second
guide--between two young chiefs, brothers of the wamanda tribe, who
were contending for the reins of government on the principle that
might ought to give the right. our new course led us out of the
msalala into the uyombo district, which is governed by a sultan called
mihambo. he paid me a visit and presented a sheep--a small present,
for he was a small chief, and could not demand a hongo. i gave in
return one shukka merikani and one shukka kiniki. here all the people
were very busily engaged in their harvest, cutting their jowari, and
thrashing it out with long sticks.

the whole country lies in long waves, crested with cropping little
hills, thickly clad with small trees and brushwood. in the hollows of
these waves the cultivation is very luxuriant. here i unfortunately
had occasion to give my miserable goanese cook-boy a sound dressing,
as the only means left of checking his lying, obstinate, destructive,
wasteful, and injurious habit of intermeddling. this raised the
creature's choler, and he vowed vengeance to the death, seconding his
words with such a fiendish, murderous look, his eyes glistening like
an infuriated tiger's, that i felt obliged to damp his temerity and
freedom of tongue by further chastisement, which luckily brought him
to a proper sense of his duty.

18th.--we left at 7 a.m., and travelled ten miles to ukuni. the
country still continues of the same rich and picturesque character,
and retains daily the same unvarying temperature. on the road we met a
party of wayombo, who, taking advantage of the wamanda disturbances,
had lifted some forty or fifty head of their cattle in perfect
security. i saw two albinos in this village, one an old woman with
greyish eyes, and the other young, who ran away from fright, and
concealed herself in a hut, and would not show again although beads
were offered as an inducement for one moment's peep. the old lady's
skin was of an unwholesome fleshy-pink hue, and her hair, eyebrows,
and eyelashes were a light yellowish white. this march was shortened
by two pagazis falling sick. i surmised this illness to be in
consequence of their having gorged too much beef, to which they
replied that everybody is sure to suffer pains in the stomach after
eating meat, if the slayer of the animal happens to protrude his
tongue and clench it with his teeth during the process of
slaughtering. at last the white beads have been taken, but at the
extravagant rate of two khetes for four eggs, the dearest i ever paid.

19th.--the caravan proceeded at 6 a.m., and after going eight miles
re-entered the msalala district's frontier, where we put up in a
village three miles beyond the border. the country throughout this
march may be classed in two divisions, one of large and extensively
cultivated plains, with some fine trees about; and the other of small
irregularly-disposed hills, the prevailing granitic outcrops of the
region. there is no direct line northwards here, so we had to track
about, and hit upon the lines between the different villages, which
enhanced our trouble and caused much delay. at this place i witnessed
the odd operation of brother-making. it consists in the two men
desirous of a blood-tie being seated face to face on a cow's hide,
with their legs stretched out as wide to the front as their length
will permit, one pair overlapping the other. they then place their
bows and arrows across their thighs, and each holds a leaf: at the
same time a third person, holding a pot of oil or butter, makes an
incision above their knees, and requires each to put his blood on the
other's leaf, and mix a little oil with it, when each anoints himself
with the brother-salve. this operation over, the two brothers bawl
forth the names and extent of their relatives, and swear by the blood
to protect the other till death. ugogo, on the highway between the
coast and ujiji, is a place so full of inhabitants compared with the
other places on that line, that the coast people quote it as a
wonderful instance of high population; but this district astonished
all my retinue. the road to-day was literally thronged with a legion
of black humanity so exasperatingly bold that nothing short of the
stick could keep them from jostling me. poor creatures! they said they
had come a long way to see, and now must have a good long stare; for
when was there ever a mzungu here before?

20th.--we broke ground at 6 a.m., and after travelling through high
cultivation six miles, were suddenly stopped by a guard of wamanda,
sent by kurua, a sultan of that tribe, and chief of the division we
were marching in. their business was to inform us that if we wished to
travel to the lake, the sultan would give directions to have us
escorted by another route, as his eldest brother was disputing the
rights of government with him along the line we were now pursuing; and
added, that our intentions would be only known to him by the part we
might choose to take. these constant interruptions were becoming very
troublesome; so, as we were close to the confines of these two
malcontents, i was anxious to force our way on, and agreed to do so
with the beluches. but the tiresome, lazy, flesh-seeking pagazis saw a
feast in prospect by the sultan's arrangement, and would not move an
inch. further, the kirangozi requested his discharge if i was
otherwise than peacefully inclined. the guard then led us to mgogua,
the sultan's village, a little off the road.

kurua is a young man, not very handsome himself, but he has two
beautiful young wives. they secured me a comfortable house, showed
many attentions, and sent me a bowl of fresh sweetmilk, the very
extreme of savage hospitality. in the evening he presented me with a
bullock. this i tried to refuse, observing that flesh was the prime
cause of all my hindrances; but nothing would satisfy him; i must
accept it, or he would be the laughing-stock of everybody for
inhospitality. if i gave nothing in return, he should be happy as long
as his part of host was properly fulfilled. salt, according to the
sultan, is only to be found here in the same efflorescent state in
which i saw it yesterday--a thin coating overspreading the ground, as
though flour had been sprinkled there.

21st.--halt. i gave the sultan, as a return present, one dhoti
merikani and six cubits kiniki, what i thought to be just the value of
his bullock. his kindness was undoubtedly worthy of a higher reward,
but i feared to excite these men's cupidity, as there is no end to
their tricks and finesse whenever they find a new chance of gain, and
i now despaired of accomplishing my task in time. however, kurua
seemed quite happy under the circumstances, and considered the
exchange of hongo a bond of alliance, and proclaimed that we were
henceforth to be brothers. he then said he would accompany me back to
unyanyembe, on my return from the lake, and would exchange any of his
cows that i might take a fancy to for powder, which i said i had
there. the quantity of cattle in msalala surpasses anything i have
seen in africa. large droves, tended by a few men each, are to be seen
in every direction over the extensive plains, and every village is
filled with them at night. the cultivation also is as abundant as the
cattle are numerous, and the climate is delightful. to walk till
breakfast, 9 a.m., every morning, i find a luxury, and from that time
till noon i ride with pleasure; but the next three hours, though
pleasant in a hut, are too warm to be agreeable under hard exertion.
the evenings and the mornings, again, are particularly serene, and the
night, after 10 p.m., so cold as to render a blanket necessary. but
then it must be remembered that all the country about these latitudes,
on this meridian, 33o east, is at an altitude of from 3500 to 4000
feet. my dinner to-day was improved by the addition of tomatos and the
bird's-eye chili--luxuries to us, but which the negroes, so different
from the indians, never care about, and seldom grow.

the cotton-plant is as fine here as at unyanyembe or ujiji, and
anything would grow with only the trouble of throwing down the seed.
it is a great pity that the country is not in better hands. from all i
can gather, there is no fixed revenue paid to these sultans; all their
perquisites are occasional hongos received from travellers; a
percentage on all foreign seizures, whether by battle or plunder; and
a certain part of all windfalls, such as a share of the sportsman's
game-bag, in the shape of elephants' tusks or flesh, or the skins of
any wild animals; otherwise they live by the sweat of the brow of
their slaves, in tilling their ground, tending their cattle, or
trafficking for them in slaves and ivory. it seems destined that i
should never reach the goal of my ambition. to-day the jemadar finds
himself too unwell to march, and two other beluches say the same. this
is an effectual obstacle; for the guard declares itself too weak to
divide, and the sultan blows on the fire of my mortification by saying
that these are troubled times, and advises our keeping all together.
he says that his differences have been going on these five years with
his eldest brother, and now he wishes to bring them to a crisis, which
he proposes doing after my return, when he will obtain powder from me,
and will have the preponderating influence of arab opinion brought to
bear in his favour by the aid of their guns--an impressive mode which
africa has of proving right in its own way.

22d.--after much groaning and grumbling, i got the sick men on their
legs by 7 a.m., and we marched eight miles to senagongo, the boma[56]
(palisade) of sultan kanoni, kurua's second brother. these two younger
brothers side together against the eldest. they are all by different
mothers, and think the father's property should fairly be divided
among them. it is a glaring instance of the bad effects of a plurality
of wives; and being contrary to our constitutional laws of marriage, i
declined giving an opinion as to who was right or wrong.

to avoid the seat of war my track was rather tortuous. on the east or
right side the country was open, and afforded a spacious view; but on
the west this was limited by an irregularly-disposed series of low
hills. cultivation and scrub-jungle alternated the whole way. the
miserable goanese, like a dog slinking off to die, slipped away behind
the caravan, and hid himself in the jungle to suffer the pangs of
fever in solitude. i sent men to look for him in vain: party succeeded
party in the search, till at last night set in without his appearing.
it is singular in this country to find how few men escape some fever
or other sickness, who make a sudden march after living a quiet
stationary life. it appears as if the bile got stirred, suffused the
body, and, exciting the blood, produced this effect. i had to admonish
a silly beluch, who, foolishly thinking that powder alone could not
hurt a man, fired his gun off into a mass of naked human legs, in
order, as he said, to clear the court. the consequence was, that at
least fifty pairs got covered with numerous small bleeding wounds, all
dreadfully painful from the saltpetre contained in the powder. it was
fortunate that the sultan was a good man, and was present at the time
it occurred, else a serious row might have been the consequence of
this mischievous trick.

23d.--halt. we fired alarm-guns all night to no purpose; so at
daybreak three different parties, after receiving particular orders
how to scour the country, were sent off at the same time to search for
gaetano. fortunately the beluches obeyed my injunctions, and at 10
a.m. returned with the man, who looked for all the world exactly like
a dog who, guilty of an indiscretion, is being brought in disgrace
before his master to receive a flogging; for he knew i had a spare
donkey for the sick, and had constantly warned the men from stopping
behind alone in these lawless countries. the other two parties
adopting, like true easterns, a better plan of their own, spent the
whole day ranging wildly over the country, fruitlessly exerting
themselves, and frustrating any chance of my getting even an
afternoon's march. kanoni very kindly sent messengers all over his
territory to assist in the search: he, like kurua, has taken every
opportunity to show me those little pleasing attentions which always
render travelling agreeable. these wamanda are certainly the most
noisy set of beings that i ever met with: commencing their fetes in
the middle of the village every day at 3 p.m., with screaming,
yelling, rushing, jumping, sham-fighting, drumming, and singing in one
collective inharmonious noise, they seldom cease till midnight. their
villages, too, are everywhere much better protected by bomas
(palisading) than is usual in africa, arguing that they are a rougher
and more war-like people than the generality. if shoved aside, or
pushed with a stick, they show their savage nature by turning fiercely
like a fatted pig upon whoever tries to poke it up.

24th.--the march commenced at 7 a.m.; and here we again left the
direct road, to avoid a third party of belligerent wamanda, situated
in the northern extremity of the msalala district, on the highway
between unyanyembe and the lake. on bidding the sultan adieu, he was
very urgent in his wishes that i should take a bullock from him. this
i told him i should willingly have accepted, only that it would delay
my progress; and he, more kindly than the other chief, excused me.
finding that none of our party knew the road, he advanced a short way
with us, and generously offered to furnish us with a guide to the lake
and back, saying that he would send one of his own men after us to a
place he appointed with my kirangozi. i expressed my gratitude for his
consideration, and we parted with warm regard for one another.
unfortunately, bombay, who is not the clearest man in the world in
expressing himself, stupidly bungled the sultan's arrangement, and we
missed the man.

to keep the pagazis going was a matter of no little difficulty; after
the fifth mile they persisted in entering every village that they came
across, and, throwing down their loads, were bent upon making an easy
day's work of it. i, on the contrary, was equally persistent in going
on, and neither would allow the beluches to follow them, nor enter the
villages myself, until they, finding their game of no avail, quietly
shouldered their loads and submitted to my orders. this day's journey
was twelve miles over a highly-cultivated, waving country, at the end
of which we took up our abode in a deserted village called kahama.

25th.--we got under way at 7 a.m., and marched seven and a half hours,
when we entered a village in the district of nindo, nineteen miles
distant. after passing through a belt of jungle three miles broad, we
came upon some villages amidst a large range of cultivation. this
passed, we penetrated a large wilderness of thorn and bush jungle,
having sundry broad grassy flats lying at right angles to the road.
here i saw a herd of hartebeests, giraffes, and other animals, giving
to the scene a truly african character. the tracks of elephants and
different large beasts prove that this place is well tenanted in the
season. the closeness of the jungle and evenness of the land prevented
my taking any direct observations with the compass; but the mean
oscillations of its card showed a course with northing again. this
being a long stage, i lent my ass to a sick beluch, and we
accomplished the journey, notwithstanding the great distance, in a
pleasant and spirited manner. this despatch may in part be
attributable to there being so much desert, and the beloved "grub" and
the village lying ahead of us luring the men on.

26th.--we broke ground at 7 a.m., and, after passing the village
cultivation, entered a waterless wilderness of thorn and tree forest,
with some long and broad plains of tall grass intersecting the line of
march. these flats very much resemble some we crossed when travelling
close to and parallel with the malagarazi river; for the cracked and
flawy nature of the ground, now parched up by a constant drought,
shows that this part gets inundated in the wet season. indeed, this
peculiar grassy flat formation suggests the proximity of a river
everywhere in africa; and i felt sure, as afterwards proved true, that
a river was not far from us. the existence of animal life is another
warranty of water being near: elephants and buffaloes cannot live a
day without it.

fortunately for my mapping, a small conical hill overtopped the trees
in advance of our track, at twelve miles from the starting-point. we
eventually passed alongside of it, and travelled on six miles farther
to a village in the cultivated plain of salawe, a total distance of
eighteen miles. the whole country about here was covered with
harvest-workers, who, on seeing my approach, left off work and
followed me into the village. as nothing proves better the real
feelings and natural propensities of a nation than the impulsive
actions of the children, i will give a striking instance, as it
occurred to me to-day. on seeing a child approach me, i offered him a
handful of beads, upon which the greedy little urchin snatched them
from my hand with all the excited eagerness of a monkey. he clenched
tight hold of them in his little fists, and, without the slightest
show of any emotions of gratitude, retired, carrying his well-earned
prize away with a self-satisfied and perfectly contented air, not even
showing the beads to his parents or playmates. i called bombay's
attention to this transaction, and contrasted it with the joyful,
grateful manner in which an english child would involuntarily act if
suddenly become possessed of so much wealth, by hurrying off to his
mamma, and showing what fine things the kind gentleman had given him.
bombay passed on my remark, with a twelvemonth's grin upon his face,
to his inquiring brother mabruki, and then explained the matter to his
sooty friends around, declaring that such tumma (avaricious)
propensities were purely typical of the seedi's nature.

at the usual hour of departure this morning, the kirangozi discovered
that the pagazis' feet were sore from the late long marches, and
declared that they could not walk. to this the jemadar replied that
the best asylum for such complaints was on ahead, where the sahib
proposed to kill some goats and rest a day. the kirangozi replied,
"but the direct road is blocked up by wars: if a march must be made, i
will show another route three marches longer round." "that," answered
the jemadar, "is not your business: if any troubles arise from
marauders, we, the beluches, are the fighting men--leave that to us."
at last the kirangozi, getting quite disconcerted, declared that there
was no water on the way. "then," quoth the energetic jemadar, "were
your gourds made for nothing? if you don't pack up at once, you and my
stick shall make acquaintance." the party was then off in a moment.

on the way we met some herdsmen driving their cattle to unyanyembe,
and inquired from them the state of the road. they said that the
country beyond a certain distance was safe and quiet, but corroborated
the kirangozi's statement as to warriors being in the immediate
neighbourhood, who came and visited this place from the west, where is
the northern extremity of the msalala district. several varieties of
antelopes were seen, and the beluches fired at an ostrich. as in the
last place, no milk could be obtained, for the people, fearing the
wamanda, had driven off their cattle to the northward. it is evident,
from the general nakedness of the people, that cloth or beads do not
find their way much here, which is accounted for by so few merchants
ever coming this way. hardly a neck here is decorated, and they seldom
wear anything but the common goat-skin covering, hung over the
shoulder by a strap or string like a game-bag, which covers only one
hip at a time, and might as well be dispensed with as far as decency
is concerned; but at night they take it off, and spread it on the
ground to protect themselves from the cold and moisture of the earth.
this district is occupied by a tribe called waumba; to the east of it,
thirty miles distant, are the wanatiya, and thirty miles westward the
wazinza tribes.

27th.--at 6 a.m. we crawled through the opening in the palisading
which forms the entrances of these villages, and at once perceived a
tall, narrow pillar of granite, higher than pompey's at alexandria, or
nelson's monument in charing cross, towering above us, and having
sundry huge boulders of the same composition standing around its base,
much in the same peculiar way as we see at stonehenge, on salisbury
plain. this scene strikes one with wonderment at the oddities of
nature, and taxes one's faculties to imagine how on earth the stones
ever became tilted up in this extraordinary position; but farther on,
about five miles distant, we encountered another and even higher
pillar, that quite overtopped the trees and everything about it. this
and the former one served as good station-marks for the journey, the
latter being visible at eight miles' distance. after the first eight
miles, which terminates the cultivated district of salawe, the track
penetrated a waterless desert of thorn and small tree-forest, lying in
a broad valley between low hills. as the sick beluch still occupied my
steadier donkey ted, i was compelled to mount the half-broken
jenny--so playful with her head and heels that neither the sheikh nor
any other man dared sit upon her. the man's sickness appears to be one
of those eccentric complaints, the after-effects of african fevers: it
was attended with severe pain, and swelling extending over the
stomach, the right side, the right arm, and the right half of the
neck, depriving him of sleep and repose. in every position, whether
sitting, lying, standing, rising up, or sitting down, he complained of
aching muscles. i purchased a goat and sheep for the men for one dhoti
merikani.

28th.--halt. this stoppage was for the restoration of wounded feet,
the pagazis' being all blistered by the last four long marches. i now
slaughtered and gave the two purchased animals to the men, as no one
grumbled at my refusing the last bullock, a recognised present for the
whole party, though nominally given to the sahib. these people, like
the arabs, and all those who have many wives, seem to find little
enjoyment in that domestic bliss so interesting and beautiful in our
english homes. except on rare occasions, the husband never dines with
his wife and family, always preferring the exclusive society of his
own sex: even the boys, disdaining to dine with their mothers, mess
with the men; whilst the girls and women, having no other option, eat
a separate meal by themselves.

29th.--we started at 6 a.m., and marched thirteen miles to a village
at the northern extremity of the district. the face of the country is
still very irregular, sometimes rising into hills, at other times
dropping into dells, but very well cultivated in the lower portion;
whilst the brown granite rocks, with trees and brushwood covering the
upper regions, diversify the colouring, and form a pleasing contrast
to the scene; added to this, large and frequent herds graze about the
fields and amongst the villages, and give animation to the whole.
amongst the trees, palms take a prominent part. indeed, for tropical
scenery, there are few places that could equal this; and if the
traveller, as he moves along, surrounded by the screeching, howling,
inquisitive savages, running rudely about and boisterously jostling
him, could only divest himself of the idea that he is a bear baited by
a yelping pack of hounds, the journey would be replete with enjoyment.

crossing some hills, the caravan sprang a covey of guinea-fowls, and
at some springs in a valley i shot several couple of sand-grouse,
darker in plumage than any i ever saw in africa or india, and not
quite so big as the tibet bird. the chief of the village offered me a
bullock; but as the beast did not appear until the time of starting, i
declined it. neither did i give him any cloth, being convinced in my
mind that these and other animals have always been brought to me by
the smaller chiefs at the instigation of the kirangozi, and probably
aided by the flesh-loving party in general. the jemadar must have been
particularly mortified at my way of disposing of the business, for he
talked of nothing else but flesh and the animal from the moment it was
sent for, his love for butcher-meat amounting almost to a frenzy. the
sandstone in this region is highly impregnated with iron, and smelters
do a good business; indeed, the iron for nearly all the tools and
cutlery that are used in this division of eastern africa is found and
manufactured here. it is the brummagem of the land, and has not only
rich but very extensive ironfields stretching many miles north, east,
and west. i brought some specimens away. cloth is little prized in
this especially bead country, and i had to pay the sum of one dhoti
kiniki for one pot of honey and one pot of ghee (clarified butter).

30th.--the caravan started at 6 a.m., and travelled four miles
northwards, amidst villages and cultivation. from this point, on
facing to the left, i could discern a sheet of water, about four miles
from me, which ultimately proved to be a creek, and the most southern
point of the n'yanza, which, as i have said before, the arabs
described to us as the ukerewe sea.[57] we soon afterwards descended
into a grassy and jungly depression, and arrived at a deep, dirty,
viscid nullah (a watercourse that only runs in wet weather), draining
the eastern country into the southern end of the creek. to cross this
(which i shall name jordan) was a matter of no small difficulty,
especially for the donkeys, whose fording seemed quite hopeless, until
the jemadar, assisted by two other beluches, with blows and threats
made the lazy pagazis work, and dragged them through the mud by sheer
force. this operation lasted so long that, after crossing, we made for
the nearest village in the uvira district, and completed a journey of
eight miles. the country to the eastward appeared open and waving, but
to the north and far west very hilly. the ground is fertile, and the
flocks and herds very abundant. hippopotami frequent the nullah at
night, and reside there during the rainy season; but at this, the dry
half of the year, they retreat to the larger waters of the creek.
rhinoceroses are said to pay nightly visits to fields around the
villages, and commit sad havoc on the crops. the nullah, running from
the south-east, drains the land in that direction; but a river, i
hear, rising in the msalala district, draws off the water from the
lays we have recently been crossing, to the westward of our track,
where its course lies, and empties it into the creek on the opposite
side to where the nullah debouches.

31st.--on hearing that a shorter track than the sukuma one usually
frequented by the arabs led to muanza, the place sheikh snay advised
my going to, i started by it at 8 a.m.; and after following it
west-ward down the nullah's right bank a few miles, turned up
northwards, and continued along the creek to a village, eight miles
distant, at the farther end of the urima district, where we took up
our quarters. the country has a mixed and large population of smiths,
agriculturists, and herdsmen, residing in the flats and depressions
which lie between the scattered little hills. during the rainy season,
when the lake swells and the country becomes super-saturated, the
inundations are so great that all travelling becomes suspended. the
early morning was wasted by the unreasonable pagazis in the following
absurd manner.

it will be remembered that, on starting from unyanyembe, these cunning
rascals begged for cloth as a necessary protection against the cold.
this seemed reasonable enough, if they had not just before that
received their hire in cloth; for the nights were so cold that i
should have been sorry to be as naked as they were; but their real
motive for asking was only to increase their stock for this present
occasion, as we now shall see. two days ago they broke ground with
great difficulty, and only on my assuring them that i would wait at
the place a day or two on my return from the lake, as they expressed
their desire to make a few halts there, and barter their hire of cloth
for jembes (iron hoes), to exchange again at unyanyembe, where those
things fetch double the price they do in these especially iron
regions. now, to-day these dissembling creatures, distrusting my word
as they would their own brethren's, stoutly refused to proceed until
their business was completed,--suspecting i should break my word on
returning, and would not then wait for them. they had come all this
way especially for their own benefit, and now meant to profit by their
trouble. fortunately, the jemadar and some other beluches, who of late
had shown great energy and zeal in promoting my views, pointed out to
them that they were really more bound to do my business than their
own, as they had engaged to do so, and since they could never have
come there at all excepting through my influence and by my cloths;
further, if they bought their hoes then, they would have to carry them
all the way to the lake and back. the kirangozi acknowledged the
fairness of this harangue, and soon gave way; but it was not until
much more arguing, and the adoption of other persuasive means, that
the rest were induced to relinquish their determination.

1st august.--this day's march, commenced at 6 a.m., differs but little
from the last. following down the creek, which, gradually increasing
in breadth as it extended northwards, was here of very considerable
dimensions, we saw many little islands, well-wooded elevations,
standing boldly out of its waters, which, together with the
hill-dotted country around, afforded a most agreeable prospect. would
that my eyes had been strong enough to dwell, unshaded, upon such
scenery! but my french grey spectacles so excited the crowds of sable
gentry who followed the caravan, and they were so boisterously rude,
stooping and peering underneath my wide-awake to gain a better sight
of my double eyes, as they chose to term them, that it became
impossible for me to wear them. i therefore pocketed the instrument,
closed my eyes, and allowed the donkey i was riding to be quietly
pulled along. the evil effects of granting an indulgence to those who
cannot appreciate it, was more obvious every day. to secure speed and
contentment, i had indulged the pagazis by hiring double numbers, and
giving each only half a recognised burden; but what has been the
return? yesterday the pagazis stopped at the eighth mile, because they
said that so large a jungle was in our front that we could not cross
it during daylight.

i disbelieved their story, and gave them to understand, on submitting
to their request, that i was sure their trick for stopping me would
turn to their own disadvantage; for if my surmise proved true, as the
morrow would show, i should give them no more indulgence, and
especially no more meat. on our arrival to-day there was a great
hubbub amongst them, because i ordered the jemadar and kirangozi, with
many of their principal men, to sit in state before me; when i gave a
cloth to the soldiers to buy a goat with, and, turning to the
kirangozi, told him i was sorry i was obliged to keep my word of
yesterday, and, their story having proved false, i must depart from
the principle i had commenced upon, of feeding both parties alike, and
now they might feel assured that i would do nothing further for their
comfort until i could see in them some desire to please me. the screw
was on the tenderest part: a black man's belly is his god; and they no
sooner found themselves deprived of their wonted feast, than they
clamorously declared they would be my devoted servants; that they had
come expressly to serve me, and were willing to do anything i wished.
the village chief offered me a goat; but as it came at the last moment
before starting, i declined it.

to-day's track lay for the first half of the way over a jungly
depression, where we saw ostriches, florikans, and the small saltiana
antelopes; but as their shyness did not allow of an open approach, i
amused myself by shooting partridges. during the remainder of the way,
the caravan threaded between villages and cultivation lying in small
valleys, or crossed over low hills, accomplishing a total distance of
twelve miles. here we put up at a village called ukumbi, occupied by
the walaswanda tribe.

2d.--we set out at 6 a.m., and travelled thirteen miles by a tortuous
route, sometimes close by the creek, at other times winding between
small hills, the valleys of which were thickly inhabited by both
agricultural and pastoral people. here some small perennial streams,
exuding from springs by the base of these hills, meander through the
valleys, and keep all vegetable life in a constant state of verdant
freshness. the creek still increases in width as it extends northward,
and is studded with numerous small rocky island-hills covered with
brushwood, which, standing out from the bosom of the deep-blue waters,
reminded me of a voyage i once had in the grecian archipelago. the
route also being so diversified with hills, afforded fresh objects of
attraction at every turn; and to-day, by good fortune, the usually
troublesome people have attended more to their harvest-making, and
left me to the enjoyment of the scenery. my trusty blissett made a
florikan pay the penalty of death for his temerity in attempting a
flight across the track. the day's journey lasted thirteen miles, and
brought us into a village called isamiro.




chapter iv.

first sight of the victoria n'yanza--its physical
geography--speculations on its being the source of the nile--sport on
the lake--sultans machunda and mahaya--missionary accounts of the
geography--arab accounts--regrets at inability to complete the
discovery--the march resumed--history of the
watuta--hippopotamus-hunting--adventures--kahama.



august 3d.--the caravan, after quitting isamiro, began winding up a
long but gradually inclined hill--which, as it bears no native name, i
shall call somerset--until it reached its summit, when the vast
expanse of the pale-blue waters of the n'yanza burst suddenly upon my
gaze. it was early morning. the distant sea-line of the north horizon
was defined in the calm atmosphere between the north and west points
of the compass; but even this did not afford me any idea of the
breadth of the lake, as an archipelago of islands (_vide_ map, bengal
archipelago), each consisting of a single hill, rising to a height of
200 or 300 feet above the water, intersected the line of vision to the
left; while on the right the western horn of the ukerewe island cut
off any farther view of its distant waters to the eastward of north. a
sheet of water--an elbow of the sea, however, at the base of the low
range on which i stood--extended far away to the eastward, to where,
in the dim distance, a hummock-like elevation of the mainland marked
what i understood to be the south and east angle of the lake. the
important islands of ukerewe and mzita, distant about twenty or thirty
miles, formed the visible north shore of this firth. the name of the
former of these islands was familiar to us as that by which this
long-sought lake was usually known. it is reported by the natives to
be of no great extent; and though of no considerable elevation, i
could discover several spurs stretching down to the water's edge from
its central ridge of hills. the other island, mzita, is of greater
elevation, of a hog-backed shape, but being more distant, its physical
features were not so distinctly visible.

in consequence of the northern islands of the bengal archipelago
before mentioned obstructing the view, the western shore of the lake
could not be defined: a series of low hill-tops extended in this
direction as far as the eye could reach; while below me, at no great
distance, was the debouchure of the creek, which enters the lake from
the south, and along the banks of which my last three days' journey
had led me. this view was one which, even in a well-known and explored
country, would have arrested the traveller by its peaceful beauty. the
islands, each swelling in a gentle slope to a rounded summit, clothed
with wood between the rugged angular closely-cropping rocks of
granite, seemed mirrored in the calm surface of the lake; on which i
here and there detected a small black speck, the tiny canoe of some
muanza fisherman. on the gently shelving plain below me, blue smoke
curled above the trees, which here and there partially concealed
villages and hamlets, their brown thatched roofs contrasting with the
emerald green of the beautiful milk-bush, the coral branches of which
cluster in such profusion round the cottages, and form alleys and
hedgerows about the villages as ornamental as any garden shrub in
england. but the pleasure of the mere view vanished in the presence of
those more intense and exciting emotions which are called up by the
consideration of the commercial and geographical importance of the
prospect before me.

i no longer felt any doubt that the lake at my feet gave birth to that
interesting river, the source of which has been the subject of so much
speculation, and the object of so many explorers. the arabs' tale was
proved to the letter. this is a far more extensive lake than the
tanganyika; "so broad you could not see across it, and so long that
nobody knew its length."[58] i had now the pleasure of perceiving that
a map i had constructed on arab testimony, and sent home to the royal
geographical society before leaving unyanyembe, was so substantially
correct that in its general outlines i had nothing whatever to alter.
further, as i drew that map after proving their first statements about
the tanganyika, which were made before my going there, i have every
reason to feel confident of their veracity relative to their travels
north through karague, and to kibuga in uganda.

when sheikh snay told us of the ukerewe, as he called the n'yanza, on
our first arrival at kaze, proceeding westward from zanzibar, he said,
"if you have come only to see a large bit of water, you had better go
northwards and see the ukerewe; for it is much greater in every
respect than the tanganyika;" and so, as far as i can ascertain, it
is. muanza, our journey's end, now lay at our feet. it is an open,
well-cultivated plain on the southern end, and lies almost flush with
the lake; a happy, secluded-looking corner, containing every natural
facility to make life pleasant. after descending the hill, we followed
along the borders of the lake, and at first entered mahaya's palace,
when the absence of boats arousing my suspicions, made me inquire
where the arabs, on coming to muanza, and wishing to visit ukerewe,
usually resided. this, i heard, was some way farther on; so with great
difficulty i persuaded the porters to come away and proceed at once to
where they said an arab was actually living. it was a singular
coincidence that, after sheikh snay's caution as to my avoiding sultan
mahaya's palace, by inquiring diligently about him yesterday, and
finding no one who knew his name, the first person i should have
encountered was himself, and that, too, in his own palace. the reason
of this was, that big men in this country, to keep up their dignity,
have several names, and thus mystify the traveller.

i then proceeded along the shore of the lake in an easterly direction,
and on the way shot a number of red egyptian geese, which were very
numerous; they are the same sort here as i once saw in the somali
country. another goose, which unfortunately i could not kill, is very
different from any i ever saw or heard of: it stands as high as the
canadian bird, or higher, and is black all over, saving one little
white patch beneath the lower mandible. it was fortunate that i came
on here, for the arab in question, called mansur bin salim, treated me
very kindly, and he had retainers belonging to the country, who knew
as much about the lake as anybody, and were of very great assistance.
i also found a good station for making observations on the lake. it
was mansur who first informed me of my mistake of the morning; but he
said that the evil reports spread at unyanyembe about mahaya had no
foundation; on the contrary, he had found him a very excellent and
obliging person.

to-day we marched eight miles, and have concluded our journey
northwards, a total distance of 226 miles from kaze, which, occupying
twenty-five days, is at the rate of nine miles per diem, halts
inclusive.

4th.--early in the morning i took a walk of three miles easterly along
the shore of the lake, and, ascending a small hill (which, to
distinguish it, i have called observatory hill), took compass bearings
of all the principal features of the lake. mansur and a native, the
greatest traveller of the place, kindly accompanied me, and gave me
every obtainable information. this man had traversed the island, as he
called it, of ukerewe from north to south. but by his rough mode of
describing it, i am rather inclined to think that instead of its being
an actual island, it is a connected tongue of land, stretching
southwards from a promontory lying at right angles to the eastern
shore of the lake, which, being a wash, affords a passage to the
mainland during the fine season, but during the wet becomes submerged,
and thus makes ukerewe temporarily an island.

if this conjecture be true, mzita must be similarly circumstanced.
cattle, he says, can cross over from the mainland at all seasons of
the year, by swimming from one elevation of the promontory to another;
but the warudi, who live upon the eastern shore of the lake, and bring
their ivory for sale to ukerewe, usually employ boats for the transit.
a sultan called machunda lives at the southern extremity of the
ukerewe, and has dealings in ivory with all the arabs who go there.
one arab at this time was stopping there, and had sent his men
coasting along this said promontory to deal with the natives on the
mainland, as he could not obtain enough ivory on the island itself.
considering how near the eastern shore of the lake is to zanzibar, it
appears surprising that it can pay men to carry ivory all the way
round by unyanyembe. but the masai, and especially those tribes who
live near to the lake, are so hostile to travellers, that the risk of
going there is considered too great to be profitable, though all arabs
concur in stating that a surprising quantity of ivory is to be
obtained there at a very cheap rate.

the little hill alluded to as marking the south-east angle of the
lake, i again saw; but so indistinctly, though the atmosphere was very
clear, that i imagined it to be at least forty miles distant. it is
due east of my station on observatory hill. i further draw my
conclusions from the fact, that all the hills on the country are much
about the same height--two or three hundred feet above the basial
surface of the land; and i could only see the top of the hill like a
hazy brown spot, contrasted in relief against the clear blue sky.
indeed, had my attention not been drawn to it, i should probably have
overlooked it, and have thought there was only a sea horizon before
me. on facing to the w.n.w., i could only see a sea horizon; and on
inquiring how far back the land lay, was assured that, beyond the
island of ukerewe, there was an equal expanse of it east and west, and
that it would be more than double the distance of the little hill
before alluded to, or from eighty to one hundred miles in breadth.[59]

on my inquiring about the lake's length, the man faced to the north,
and began nodding his head to it; at the same time he kept throwing
forward his right hand, and, making repeated snaps of his fingers,
endeavoured to indicate something immeasurable; and added, that nobody
knew, but he thought it probably extended to the end of the world. to
the east of the observatory, a six hours' journey, probably fourteen
or fifteen miles, the village of sukuma is situated, and there canoes
are obtainable for crossing to ukerewe, which island being six hours'
paddling, and lying due north of it, must give the firth a breadth of
about fifteen miles.

whilst walking back to camp, i shot two red geese and a florikan, like
those i once shot in the somali country. this must have been a dainty
dish for my half-starved arab companion, who had lost all his property
on first arriving here, and was now living on mahaya's generosity. it
appears that nine months ago he was enabled, by the assistance of
mahaya, to hire some boats and men at sukuma, and had sent his
property, consisting of fifteen loads of cloth and 250 jembis or hoes,
by them to ukerewe, to exchange for ivory. but by the advice of
mahaya, and fearing to trust himself as a stranger amongst the
islanders, he did not accompany his merchandise. sultan machunda, a
man of the highest character by unyanyembe report, on seeing such a
prize enter his port, gave orders for its seizure, and will now give
no redress to the unfortunate mansur. all mahaya's exertions to
recover it have proved abortive: and mansur has therefore been
desirous of taking his revenge by making an attack in person on
ukerewe, but the "generous" mahaya said, "no; your life is yet safe,
do not risk it; but let my men do what they can, and in the meanwhile,
as i have been a party to your losses, i will feed you and your
people; and if i do not succeed in the end, you shall be my guest
until i can amass sufficient property to reimburse your losses."

mansur has all this time been living, like the slaves of the country,
on jowari porridge, which is made by grinding the seed into flour and
boiling it in water until it forms a good thick paste, when master and
man sit round the earthen pot it is boiled in, pick out lumps, and
suck it off their fingers. it was a delicious sight yesterday, on
coming through muanza, to see the great deference paid to the sick
beluch, shadad, mistaken for the great arab merchant (mundewa), my
humble self, in consequence of his riding my donkey, and to perceive
the stoical manner in which he treated their attentions; but, more
fortunate than i usually have been, he escaped the rude peeping and
peering of the crowd, for he did not, like his employer, wear "double
eyes" (spectacles).

during the last five or six marches, the word marabu (arab), instead
of mzungu (european), has usually been applied to me; and no one, i am
sure, would have discovered the difference, were it not that the
tiresome pagazis, to increase their own dignity and importance,
generally gave the clue by singing the song of "the white man." the
arabs at unyanyembe had advised my donning their habit for the trip,
in order to attract less attention: a vain precaution, which i believe
they suggested more to gratify their own vanity by seeing an
englishman lower himself to their position, than for any benefit that
i might receive by doing so. at any rate, i was more comfortable and
better off in my flannel shirt, long togs, and wide-awake, than i
should have been, both mentally and physically, had i degraded myself,
and adopted their hot, long, and particularly uncomfortable gown.

sultan mahaya sent a messenger to say that he was hurt at the cavalier
manner in which i treated him yesterday; and, to show his wounded
feelings, gave an order to his subjects that no man should supply me
with provisions, or render me any assistance during my sojourn at
muanza. luckily my larder was well supplied with game, or i should
have had to go supperless to bed, for no inducement would prevail on
the people to sell anything to me after the mandate had been
proclaimed. this morning, however, we settled the difference, in the
most amicable manner, thus: previous to my departure for observatory
hill, i sent the jemadar, the kirangozi, and a large deputation of the
beluches and pagazis, to explain away the reason of my having left his
house so rudely, and to tender apologies, which were accompanied, as
an earnest of good-will, with a large hongo, consisting of one
barsati, one dhoti merikani, and one gora kiniki, as also an
intimation that i would pay him a visit the next day. this pleased him
excessively; it was considered a visit of itself; and he returned the
usual bullock, with a notification that i must remain where i was, to
enable him to return the compliment i had paid him, for he intended
walking out to see me on the morrow.

5th.--as my time was getting short, i forestalled mahaya in his
intentions, and changed ground to the palace, a rural-looking little
place, perched on a small rocky promontory, shrouded by green trees,
facing the n.w. side of the lake. mahaya received me with great
courtesy, arranged a hut comfortably, and presented a number of eggs
and fresh milk, as he had heard that i was partial to such fare. he is
a man of more than ordinary stature, a giant in miniature, with
massive and muscular but well-proportioned limbs: he must number fifty
years or more. his dress was the ordinary barsati; his arms were set
off by heavy brass and copper ornaments encircling the wrists, and by
numberless sambo, or thin circles made from the twisted fibres of an
aloetic plant, on each of which a single infi, or white porcelain bead
resembling a little piece of tobacco-pipe, was strung; these ranged in
massive rows down the whole of his upper arm. just above his
elbow-joints sat a pair of large ivory rings. on his forehead two
small goat or deer horns were fastened by thin talismanic ornaments of
thong for keeping off the evil eye; and, finally, his neck was adorned
with two strings of very coarse blue beads. mahaya has the fame of
being the best and most just sultan in these quarters, and his benign
square countenance, lit up with a pleasing expression when in
conversation, confirms this opinion, though a casual observer passing
by that dark, broad, massive face, still more darkened by a matting of
short, close, and tightly-curled-up ringlets, would be apt to carry
away a contrary impression.[60]

before leaving kaze i notified my intention of visiting ukerewe,
supposing i could do so in three or four days, and explained to my men
my wishes on this point. hearing this, they told both mahaya and
mansur, in direct terms, that i was going, and so needlessly set them
to work finessing to show how much they were in earnest in their
consideration of me. however, they have both been very warm in
dissuading me from visiting ukerewe, apparently quite in a parental
way, for each seems to think himself in a measure my guardian. mahaya
thinks it his duty to caution those who visit him from running into
danger, which a journey to ukerewe, he considers, would be. mansur, on
the other hand, says, as i have come from his sultan majid, he also is
bound to render me any assistance in his power; but strongly advises
my giving up the notion of going across the water. i could get boats
from sukuma, he said, but there would be great delay in the business,
as i should have first to send over and ask permission from machunda
to land, and then the collecting men and boats would occupy a long
time.

as regards the collection of boats taking a long time, these arguments
are very fair, as i know from experience; but the only danger would
consist in the circumstance of the two sultans being at enmity with
each other, as in this land any one coming direct from an enemy's
country is suspected and treated as an enemy. this difficulty i should
have avoided by going straight to sukuma (where the boats, i am
inclined to think, usually do start from, though all concur in stating
that this is their point of departure), and there obtaining boats
direct. however, i told them that i should have gone if i had found
boats ready at once to take me across; but now i saw the probability
of so much delay, that i could not afford to waste time in trying to
obtain boats, which, had i succeeded in getting, i should have
employed my time not in going to ukerewe, but to the more elevated and
friendly island of mzita, this being a more suitable observatory than
the former. these negroes' manoeuvres are quite incomprehensible. if
mahaya had desired to fleece me--and one can hardly give a despotic
negro credit for anything short of that--he surely would have tried to
detain me under false hopes, and have thus necessitated my spending
cloths in his village; while, on the contrary, he lost all chance of
gaining anything by giving advice which induced me to leave him at
once, never to return again to see him.

at my request, mahaya assembled all his principal men, and we went
into a discussion about the lake; but not a soul knew anything about
its northern extremity, although people had sometimes travelled in
canoes, coasting along its shores by the karague district to as far, i
believe, as the line.[61] his wife, a pretty crummy little creature of
the wanyoro tribe, came farther from the north than anybody present,
and gave me the names of many districts in the uganda country, which,
she says, lies along the seashore. she had never heard of there being
any end to the lake, and supposed, if any way of going round it did
exist, she would certainly have known it. it is well known that there
is no communication between the east and west shores of the lake,
excepting by a few occasional canoe-parties coasting along the
southern end, because the waters are so very broad they dare not
venture.[62] that there can be no high mountain-range intersecting the
n'yanza from the watercourses which we hear of north of the equator,
as some people have supposed, is evident from the numerous accounts
given of the kingdom of uganda being so flat and marshy from the
equator to 2o or 3o north latitude; whilst i must have seen any, did
they exist, on the south side of the equator, being only 150 miles
from it when standing on its southern shore. now, judging from all the
information given us by the several egyptian expeditions and
missionaries sent up the nile, who came across small hills in 4-1/2o
north latitude and 32o east longitude, which are intersected by the
nile in the same way that the east coast range is intersected by the
interior plateau rivers (lufiji and kingani), as we saw on our passage
inwards from zanzibar; and further, by the arabs telling us that all
the country on the same meridian, from the line up to the second
parallel north latitude, is flat and full of watercourses; and then
again, by knowing the respective heights of the n'yanza on the one
side, being nearly 4000 feet, and the nile's bed in latitude 5o n., or
beyond the small hills alluded to, being under 2000 feet--it would
indeed be a marvel if this lake is not the fountain of the nile.[63]
the reason why those expeditions sent up the nile have failed in
discovering the n'yanza, is clearly attributable to the important
rapids which must exist in consequence of this great variation of
altitude between the north end of the n'yanza (which, let us suppose,
is on the equator) and the position, in 4o 44' north latitude, at
which the expeditions and missions arrived, the rise of the river
being 2000 feet in 300 miles.

indeed, by all accounts of the country lying between the n'yanza, as
seen by the arabs in uganda, and let us say gondokoro, a mission
station on the nile, in north latitude 4o 44', which was occupied by
two austrian missionaries, knoblecher and dooyak, we find it is
somewhat analogous to what we observed between the low mrima or
maritime plain in front of zanzibar, and the high interior plateau,
divided from one another by the east coast range, which is of granitic
formation, the same in its nature exactly as those which they
describe, and intersected by rivers so rapid and boisterous that no
canoes can live upon them; as, for instance, we found the kingani and
lufiji rivers were when passing over the east coast range. there the
land dropped from 2000 or more feet to less than 300 in the short
distance of 100 miles.

i will now proceed to give, first, the missionary account in 4o 44'
n., and then the arab one in 2o n.--a debatable bit of ground,
extending over 2o 44', or 160 english miles. talking of the
missionaries, "these two men," says dr petermann, "kept an annual
hygrometrical and meteorological register with great precision and
scientific regularity.[64] they had various instruments with them;
they fixed their station, gondokoro, at 4o 44' north latitude by
astronomical observations, and determined the altitude of the nile's
bed to be only 1605 feet above the sea, by numerous good barometrical
observations.... gondokoro is surrounded on three sides by small
granitic hills, ranging about 2000 feet high, which are intersected by
the nile coming from the south, as the king of the bari country says,
from 200 to 300 miles;" which is equivalent to saying from the
n'yanza, as it lies exactly on the place he directs us to.

as the arabs do not keep thermometers, scientific instruments, or
properly distributed months and seasons, i must say for them that from
2o to 6o south latitude we found the mean temperature in the hottest
month, august, to be only 80o; that uganda must be quite 4000 feet
above the sea, to be higher than the lake which it borders; that the
rainy season is during our winter months, but most so in the spring;
and that the rivers, as we see by the malagarazi, increase more after
than before that date; that as the movement of the rains tends from
the southward to the northward, advancing with the sun, the same
influence that swells the malagarazi would also affect the uganda
rivers, as they rise merely on opposite sides of the axis of the same
mountains. the arabs say, as we also have found it, "that thunder
accompanies nearly all the storms, and the lightning there is
excessive, and so destructive that the king of uganda expresses the
greatest dread of it--indeed his own palace has been often destroyed
by lightning. the kitangule and katonga rivers are affected by the
rainy season in the same proportion as the malagarazi, and flow
north-easterly towards the lake.[65] there the kivira (island) river
(nile) of which they bring information, flows somewhere to the
northward, and is not a slow sluggish stream like the other two, but
is rapid and boisterous, showing that the country drops to the
northward." now here, in 3o north latitude, where this river is said
to flow with such great rapidity, i think will be found the southern
base-line of those small hills, 2000 feet high, lying to the south of
gondokoro, as the missionaries describe them; though these hills, to
any one looking at them from the northern side, where the land is low,
might appear a barrier to the waters of the lake lying beyond them.
this idea would not occur to any one standing on the southern side,
where the land is nearly, if not quite, as high as these hills
themselves. indeed, from the levels given, the two countries about
kibuga[66] (palace of uganda) and gondokoro may be described as two
landings, with the fall between them representing a staircase formed
by the hills in question. the country in latitudes 2o and 5o north is
therefore terraced like a hanging garden.[67]

the n'yanza, as we now see, is a large expansive sheet of water, flush
with the basial surface of the country, and lies between the mountains
of the moon (on its western side), having, according to dr krapf,
snowy kaenia on its eastern flank. krapf tells us of a large river
flowing down from the western side of this snowy peak, and trending
away to the north-west in a direction, as will be seen by the map,
leading right into my lake. now, returning again to the western side,
we find that the n'yanza is plentifully supplied by those streams
coming from the lunae montes, of which the arabs, one and all, give
such consistent and concise accounts; and the flowings of which, being
north-easterly, must, in course of time and distance, commingle with
those north-westerly off-flowings, before mentioned, of mount kaenia.
my impression is, after hearing everybody's story on the matter, that
these streams enter at opposite sides of the lake, on the northern
side of the equator, and are consequently very considerable feeders to
it. to help at once in the argument that the n'yanza exists as a large
sheet of water to the north of the equator, i will anticipate a story
recorded in my diary, by adverting to it before its order of
succession. on the return to unyanyembe, a native of msalala told me
that he had once travelled up the western shore of the n'yanza to the
district of kitara, or uddu-uganda, where, he says, coffee grows, and
which place, by fair computation of the distances given as their
travelling rates, i believe to be in about 1o north lat. to the east
of this land, at no great distance from the shore, he described the
island of kitiri as occupied by a tribe called watiri, who also grow
coffee; and there the sea was of such great extent, and when winds
blew was so boisterous, that the canoes, although as large as the
tanganyika ones (which he had also seen), did not trust themselves
upon it.

the lake has the credit of being very deep, which i cannot believe. it
certainly presents the appearance of the temporary deposit of a vast
flood overspreading a large flat surface, rather than the usual
characteristics of a lake or inland sea lying in a deep hollow, or
shut in, like the tanganyika, by mountains.[68] the islands about it
are low hill-tops, standing out like paps on the soft placid bosom of
the waters, and are precisely similar to those amongst which i have
been travelling; indeed, any part of the country inundated to the same
extent would wear the same aspect.

its water appears, perhaps owing to the disturbing influence of the
wind, of a dirty-white colour, but it is very good and sweet, though
not so pleasant to my taste as the very clear tanganyika water. the
natives, however, who have wonderfully keen palates for detecting the
relative distinctions in such matters, differ from me, and affirm that
all the inhabitants prefer it to any other, and consequently never dig
wells on the margin of the lake; whereas the tanganyika water is
invariably shunned, nobody ever drinking it unless from necessity; not
so much because they consider it to be unwholesome, as because it does
not quench or satisfy the thirst so well as spring-water. whether this
peculiarity in the qualities of the waters is to be attributed to the
n'yanza lying on a foundation chiefly composed of iron, or whether the
one lake is drained by a river, whilst the other is not, i must leave
for other and superior talents to decide.

fish and crocodiles are said to be very abundant in the lake; but with
all my endeavours to obtain some specimens, i have succeeded in seeing
only two sorts--one similar to those taken at ujiji, of a perch-like
form, and another very small, resembling our common minnow, but not
found in the ujiji market. the quantity of mosquitoes on the borders
of the lake is perfectly marvellous; the grass, bushes, and everything
growing there, are literally covered with them. as i walked along its
shores, disturbing the vegetation, they rose in clouds, and kept
tapping, in dozens at a time, against my hands and face, in the most
disagreeable manner. unlike the indian mosquito, they are of a light
dun-brown colour. the muanza dogs are the largest that i have yet seen
in africa, and still are not more than twenty inches high; but mahaya
says the ukerewe dog is a fine animal, and quite different from any on
the mainland. there are very few canoes about here, and those are of
miserable construction, and only fitted for the purpose they turn them
to--catching fish close to the shore. the paddle the fishermen use is
a sort of mongrel between a spade and a shovel. the fact of there
being no boats of any size here, must be attributed to the want of
material for constructing them. on the route from kaze there are no
trees of any girth, save the calabash, the wood of which is too soft
for boat-building. i hear that the island of ukerewe has two sultans
besides machunda, and that it is very fertile and populous. mahaya
says, "all the tribes, from the wasukuma (or northern wanyamuezi,
sukuma meaning the north), along the south and east of the lake, are
so savage and inhospitable to travellers, that it would be impossible
to go amongst them unless accompanied by a large and expensive
escort."

6th.--as no further information about the lake could be gained, i bade
mahaya and the sheikh adieu, leaving as a token of recollection one
shukka merikani for the former, one dhoti kiniki for his wife, and a
fundo of beads for the poor arab, and retraced my steps by a double
march back to ukumbi. whilst passing alongside the archipelago, i shot
two geese and a crested crane. what a pity it seemed i could not pluck
the fruit almost within my grasp! had i had but a little more time,
and a few loads of beads, i could with ease have crossed the line, and
settled every question which we had come all this distance to
ascertain. indeed, to perform that work, nobody could have started
under more advantageous circumstances than were then within my
power--all hands being in first-rate condition and health, and all in
the right temper for it. but now a new and expensive expedition must
be formed, for the capabilities of the country on the eastern flank of
the mountains of the moon, and along the western shores of the
n'yanza, are so notoriously great that it is worthy of serious
attention. my reluctance to return may be easier imagined than
described. i felt as much tantalised as the unhappy tantalus must have
been when unsuccessful in his bobbings for cherries in the
cherry-orchard, and as much grieved as any mother would be at losing
her first-born, and resolved and planned forthwith to do everything
that lay in my power to visit the lake again.

7th.--we made a march of fourteen miles, passing our second station in
urima by two miles, partly to avoid the chief of that village, a
testy, rude, and disagreeable man, who, on the last occasion,
inhospitably tried to turn us out of a hut in his village, because we
would not submit to his impudent demand of a cloth for the
accommodation--a proceeding quite at variance with anything we had met
in our former receptions; and we resisted the imposition with a
pertinacity equal to his own. besides this, by coming on the little
extra distance, we arrived at the best and cheapest place for
purchasing cows and jembies.

8th.--halt. i purchased two jembies for one shukka merikani, but could
not come to any terms with these grasping savages about their cows,
although their country teems with them, and they are sold at
wonderfully cheap prices to ordinary traders. they would not sell to
me unless i gave double value for them. the fauna of this country is
most disappointing. nearly all the animals that exist here are also to
be found in the south of africa, where they range in far greater
numbers. but then we must remember that a caravan route usually takes
the more fertile and populous tracks, and that many animals might be
found in the recesses of the forests not far off, although there are
so few on the line. the elephants are finer here than in any part of
the world, and have been known to carry tusks exceeding 500 lb. the
pair in weight. the principal wild animals besides these are the lion,
leopard, hyena, fox, pig, cape buffalo, gnu, kudu, hartebeest, pallah,
steinboc, and the little madoka, or saltiana gazelle. the giraffe,
zebra, rhinoceros, and hippopotamus are all common. the game-birds are
the bustard, florikan, guinea-fowl, partridge, quail, snipe, various
geese and ducks, and a very dark-coloured rock-pigeon or sand-grouse.
the birds in general have very tame plumage, and are much more scarce,
generally speaking, than one finds in most other countries.

the traveller on entering these agricultural districts meets with a
treatment quite opposite to what he does from the pastoral tribes,
such, for instance, as the somali, gallas, masai, &c. &c. here they at
once hail his advent as a matter of good omen, or the precursor of
good fortune, and allow him to do and see whatever he likes. they
desire his settling amongst them, appreciate the benefits of commerce
and civilisation, and are not suspicious, like the plundering
pastorals, of every one coming with evil intentions towards them. the
somali, about as bad a lot as any amongst the rovers, will not admit a
stranger into their country, unless accompanied by one of their tribe,
who becomes answerable for the traveller's actions, and even with this
passport he is watched with the eyes of argus. every strange act
committed by him, no matter how simple, absurd, or trifling, is at
once debated about in council, and always ends to viator's
disadvantage.

they add to everything they see or hear, by conjuring up the most
ridiculous phantoms; and the more ridiculous they are, the more firmly
do they at last believe in them themselves. the worse their grounds
are, the more jealously do they guard against anybody's seeing them;
and woe betide any one who should frequent any particular spot too
often: he is at once set down as designing a plot against it, to
fortify the place and take it from them; this idea is their greatest
bugbear. among that tribe blood shed by any means--by the stealthy
knife or in fair fight--is deemed meritorious and an act of heroism.
no one is ever sure of his life unless he has force to carry him
through, or can rely on the chief of the clan as his pillar of safety.
this latter plan is probably the safer one, for, as the old adage
goes, "there is honour amongst thieves;" so with these savages it is a
matter of importance to their honour and dignity, according to their
quaint notions of rectitude, to protect their trust to their utmost;
whereas, on the contrary, were that trust not reposed in them, they
would feel justified in taking any liberties, or act in opposition to
any of those general laws which guide the conduct of civilised men.

i would not, however, desire the african agricultural people to be
considered models of perfection. individually, or in small bodies, the
mass of them are very far from being so, for they would commit any
excesses without the slightest feelings of compunction. the fear of
retribution alone keeps their hands from blood and plunder. the chiefs
and principal men, if they have no higher motives, keep their
different tribes in order, and do not molest travellers without good
cause, or from provocation, as they know that protecting the traveller
is the only way in which they can keep up that connection with the
commerce of the coast which they all so much covet. it may be worthy
of remark that i have always found the lighter-coloured savages more
boisterous and warlike than those of a dingier hue. the ruddy black,
fleshy-looking wazaramo and wagogo are much lighter in colour than any
of the other tribes, and certainly have a far superior, more manly and
warlike independent spirit and bearing than any of the others.[69]


9th.--we started early, and crossed the jordans by a ferry at a place
lower down than on the first occasion. after leaving the low land, we
rose up to the higher ground where we had first gained a sight of the
n'yanza's waters, and now took our final view. to myself the parting
with it was a matter of great regret; but i believe i was the sole
sufferer from disappointment in being obliged to go south, when all my
thoughts or cares were in the north. but this feeling was much
alleviated by seeing the happy, contented, family state to which the
whole caravan had at length arrived. going home has the same
attraction with these black people that it has with schoolboys. the
beluches have long since behaved to admiration, and now even the lazy
pagazis, since completing their traffic, have lighter hearts, and
begin to feel a freshness dawn upon them. we soon entered our old
village in nera, having completed fourteen miles. here the chief, who
had travelled up the western shore of the n'yanza, assured me that
canoes like the tanganyika ones were used by the natives, and were
made from large trees which grew on the mountain-slopes overlooking
the lake. the disagreeable-mannered wasukuma (or north men) are now
left behind; their mode of articulation is most painful to the
civilised ear. each word uttered seems to begin with a t'hu or t'ha,
producing a sound like that of spitting sharply at an offensive
object. any stranger with his back turned would fancy himself insulted
by the speaker.

the country throughout is well stocked with cattle, and bullocks are
cheap, two dhotis, equal to four dollars, being the price of a
moderate-sized animal; but milch cows are dear, in consequence of the
great demand for sour curd. sheep and goats sell according to their
skills; a large one is preferred to a shukka, equal to one dollar; but
a dhoti, the proper price of three small goats, is scarcely the value
of the largest. the bane of this people is their covetousness. they do
not object to sell cheaply to a poor man, yet they hang back at the
sight of much cloth, and price their stock, not at its value, but at
what they want, or think they may get, obstinately abiding by their
decision to the last. cattle are driven from this to unyanyembe, and
consequently must be cheaper here than in those more southern parts:
still i could not purchase them so well; indeed, a traveller can never
expect to buy at a reasonable rate in a land where every man is a
sultan, and his hut a castle--where no laws regulate the market, and
every proprietor is grasping. bombay suggests that to buy cattle cheap
from the washenzi (savages), you should give them plenty of time to
consider the advantages and disadvantages of the transaction, for
their minds are not capable of arriving at a rapid conclusion; but
friend bombay forgets that, whilst waiting to beat them down a cloth
or two, four or five are consumed by the caravan in waiting. the
women, especially the younger ones, are miserably clad here; a fringe,
like the thong kilt of the nubian maidens, made of aloe fibres, with a
single white bead at the end of each string, is the general wear; it
is suspended by a strap tied round the waist. hanging over the belly,
it covers about a foot of _ground_ in breadth, but not more than seven
or eight inches in depth. the fibrous strings, white by nature, soon
turn black, and look like india-rubber, the effect of butter first
rubbed in, and then of constant friction on the grimy person. the
dangling, waving motion of this strange appendage, as the wearer moves
along, reminded me of the common fly-puzzler sometimes attached to
horses' head-stalls. amongst a crowd of fifty or sixty people, not
more than two or three have a cloth of native make, and rarely one of
foreign manufacture is to be seen. some women have stood before me in
the very primitive costume of a bunch of leafy twigs.

but far worse clad than these are the wataturu, a tribe living to the
eastward, and the watuta, living to the westward of this place,
besides the warori and others.

of the first mentioned, the wataturu, a people living a little to the
northward of turu, i have only seen a few males, and they were stark
naked. the wataturu despise any one who is weak enough to cover his
person, considering that he does so only to conceal his natural
imperfections. their women are currently reported to be as naked as
the men, but i did not see any of them, and cannot vouch for it.

the watuta, on the other hand, require a special notice, because they
are the naked zulu kafirs whose peculiar costume, if such it may be
called, has caused so much risibility at the cape of good hope. in the
very first instance, i am inclined to believe these watuta were
cushites, who migrated from the shores of the caspian sea, across
arabia and the red sea, to abyssinia. there, mixing with the negro
aborigines, they became in process of time woolly-headed. later still,
they broke off from the parent stock, lost their original name, and
took instead that of masai. by some unaccountable means they then
separated from the masai and migrated south to the cape of good hope;
here they appear to have changed their name to kafir, from which a
branch of the tribe were called zulu kafirs. these zulu kafirs
becoming restless, after a time migrated again to the west of the
nyassa, and there settled with their flocks and herds, devastating the
babisa's country. from thence again they have been migrating in
detachments north, up the east side of the tanganyika lake. whilst
doing so they came at fipa on the wapoka, another offshoot of the
cushite-abyssinians, who, crossing the nile, took the name of wahuma,
and have spread as far down south as fipa, where their name, in course
of time, had changed from wahuma to watusi, and from watusi to wapoka,
in the same way as the watuta had changed their name from masai to
kafir and zulu kafir, and again from that to watuta. now, these watuta
are still pushing northwards, fighting, plundering, and conquering
wherever they go. they have knocked the watusi out of the southern
hills of urundi, overlooking the tanganyika lake, and have spread to
the southern limits of usui, devastating the countries _en route_, in
the same way as they have done on the west of the nyassa. strange as
it may appear, neither these watuta nor the watusi know anything of
their common origin. they are very different in physical form and
appearance from one another; for, whilst the watusi _alias_ wahuma
retain their abyssinian type, the watuta _alias_ zulu kafirs are much
more like the somali and masai--thus, i think, showing that the wahuma
have detached themselves at a later period than the kafirs from the
parent stock. the wahuma are certainly the finer-looking people of the
two, but the watuta are rougher in nature. both, however, are strictly
pastoral, though the wahuma in the equatorial regions affect to
maintain large kingdoms.[70]

it is to be hoped that india, when once aroused to the advantages of
dealing more extensively with this country, will never lose sight of
the fact that the negro as well as more enlightened man can detect the
difference between good and poor stuffs; that the nation which makes
the strongest stuffs will be considered to be the honestest; and the
more lasting the material, the more readily it will be taken. in
sending cloths great care should be taken that every piece be of the
same length, and always evenly divisible by cubits, or eighteen-inch
measure. if the lion and the unicorn, figuring on the outside of each
piece--than or gora, as it is called respectively in india and
africa--were security of its being english manufacture, and, by being
so, sure to be of uniform quality and size, much respect would be
given to it; and "shukka anglesi" (english shukka) would soon take the
place of "merikani," which are by different mills, and of different
lengths and qualities. the only reason for the negro taking a large
goat-skin in preference to a shukka, is because it is stronger.

on coming here i had the misfortune to make my donkey over to bombay,
to save his foot, which had been galled by too constant walking; for
though unable to ride, he was too proud to say nay, and was therefore
placed upon it, carrying the gun consigned to his charge, captain
burton's smooth elephant. now bombay rode much after the fashion of a
sailor, trusting more to balance and good-luck than skill in sticking
on; and the consequence was, that with the first side-step the donkey
made he came to the ground an awkward cropper, falling heavily on the
small of the stock of the gun, which snapped short off, the piece
being thus irredeemably damaged. at first i rated him heartily, for
this was the second of captain burton's guns which had been damaged in
my hands. i then told bombay of the circumstances which led to the
accident to the first gun. it occurred whilst hippopotamus-shooting on
the coast rivers opposite to zanzibar; and as bombay had a little
experience in that way to relate, we had long yarns about such sport,
which served to improve our hindustani (the language i always
conversed with him in), as well as to divert our useless yet
unavoidable feelings of regret at the accident, and also killed time.

one day, when on the tanga river near its mouth, i was busily engaged
teasing hippopotami, with one man, a polesman, in a very small canoe,
just capable of carrying what it had on board, myself in the bows,
with my 4-bore blissett in hand, while captain burton's monster
elephant-gun, a double-barrelled 6-bore, weighing, i believe, 20 lb.,
was lying at the stern in the poler's charge.

the river was a tidal one, of no great breadth, and the margin was
covered by a thick growth of the mangrove shrub, on the boughs of
which the sharp-edged shells of the tree-oyster stuck in strings and
clusters in great numbers. the best time to catch the hippopotamus is
when the tide is out and the banks are bared, for then you find him
wallowing in the mud or basking on the sand (when there is any), like
jungle-hog, and with a well-directed shot on the ear, or anywhere
about the brain-pan, you have a good chance of securing him. i
especially mention this, as it is quite labour in vain, in places
where the water is deep, to fire at these animals, unless you can kill
them outright, as they dive under like a water-rat, and are never seen
more if they are only wounded. i, like most raw hands at this
particular kind of sport, began in a very different way from what, i
think, a more experienced hunter would have done, by chasing them in
the water, and firing at their heads whenever they appeared above it;
and even fired slugs about their eyes and ears, in hopes that i might
irritate them sufficiently to make them charge the canoe. this teasing
proved pretty successful; for when the tide had run clean out, only
pools and reaches, connecting by shallow runnels the volume of the
natural stream, remained for the hippopotami to sport about in; and my
manoeuvring in these confined places became so irritating, that a
large female came rapidly under water to the stern of the canoe, and
gave it such a sudden and violent cant with her head or withers, that
that end of the vessel shot up in the air, and sent me sprawling on my
back, with my legs forced up by the seat--a bar of wood--at right
angles to my body; whilst the poler and the big double gun were driven
like a pair of shuttlecocks, flying right and left of the canoe high
up into the air.

the gun on one side fell plump into the middle of the stream, and the
man on the other dropped, _post_ first, on to the hippopotamus's back,
but rapidly scrambled back into the canoe. the hippopotamus then, as
is these animals' wont, renewed the attack, but i was ready to receive
her, and as she came rolling porpoise-fashion close by the side of the
canoe, i fired a quarter of a pound of lead, backed by four drams of
powder, into the middle of her back, the muzzle of the rifle almost
touching it. she then sank, and i never saw her more; but the gun
(after lying on the sandy bottom the whole of that night), i managed,
by the aid of several divers, to find on the following day.

bombay says that on one occasion, when coming down the pangani river
in a canoe with several other men, an irritated hippopotamus charged
and upset it, upon which he and all his friends dived under water and
then swam to the shore, leaving the hippopotamus to vent his rage on
the shell of the canoe, which he most spitefully stuck to. this, he
assures me, is the proper way to dodge a hippopotamus, and escape the
danger of a bite from him. on another occasion, when i was
hippopotamus-hunting in one of the boats of the artemise, in an inlet
of the sea close to kaole, i chased a herd of hippopotami in deep
water, till one of the lot, coming as usual from below, drove a tusk
clean through the boat with such force that he partially hoisted her
out of the water; but the brute did no further damage, for i kept him
off by making the men splash their oars rapidly whilst making for the
shore, where we just arrived in time to save ourselves from sinking.

the day previous to this adventure, i bagged a fine young male
hippopotamus close to this spot, by hitting him on the ear when
standing in shallow water. the ivory of these animals is more prized
than that of the elephant, and, in consequence of the superior
hardness of its enamel, it is in great requisition with the dentist.

hippopotami are found all down this coast in very great numbers, but
especially in the deltas of the rivers, or up the streams themselves,
and afford an easy, remunerative, and pleasant sport to any man who is
not addicted to much hard exercise. the panjani, kingani, and lufiji
rivers are full of them, as well as all the other minor feeders to the
sea along that coast. if these animals happen to be killed in places
so far distant from the sea that the tidal waters have not power to
draw them out to the ocean depths, their bodies will be found, when
inflated with gas, after decomposition, floating on the surface of the
water a day or two afterwards, and can easily be secured by the
sportsman, if he be vigilant enough to take them before the hungry
watchful savages come and secure them, to appease their rapacious
appetites. mussulmans will even eat these amphibious creatures without
cutting their throats, looking on them as cold-blooded animals,
created in the same manner as fish.

the following day, 10th august, we made a halt to try our fortune
again in purchasing cows, but failed as usual; so the following
morning we decamped at dawn, and marched thirteen miles to our
original station in southern nera. here i purchased four goats for one
dhoti merikani, the best bargain i ever made. thunder had rumbled, and
clouds overcast the skies for two days; and this day a delicious
cooling shower fell. the people said it was the little rains--_chota
barsat_, as we call it in india--expected yearly at this time, as the
precursor of the later great falls.

as seedi bombay was very inquisitive to-day about the origin of
seedis, his caste, and as he wished to know by what law of nature i
accounted for their cruel destiny in being the slaves of all men, i
related the history of noah, and the dispersion of his sons on the
face of the globe; and showed him that he was of the black or hametic
stock, and by the common order of nature, they, being the weakest, had
to succumb to their superiors, the japhetic and semitic branches of
the family; and, moreover, they were likely to remain so subject until
such time as the state of man, soaring far above the beast, would be
imbued by a better sense of sympathy and good feeling, and would then
leave all such ungenerous appliances of superior force to the brute.
bombay, on being made a mussulman by his arab master, had received a
very different explanation of the degradation of his race, and
narrated his story as follows:--"the arabs say that mahomet, whilst on
the road from medina to mecca, one day happened to see a widow woman
sitting before her house, and asked her how she and her three sons
were; upon which the troubled woman (for she had concealed one of her
sons on seeing mahomet's approach, lest he, as is customary when there
are three males of a family present, should seize one and make him do
porterage), said, 'very well; but i've only two sons.' mahomet,
hearing this, said to the woman, reprovingly, 'woman, thou liest; thou
hast three sons and for trying to conceal this matter from me,
henceforth remember that this is my decree--that the two boys which
thou hast not concealed shall multiply and prosper, have fair faces,
become wealthy, and reign lords over all the earth; but the progeny of
your third son shall, in consequence of your having concealed him,
produce seedis as black as darkness, who will be sold in the market
like cattle, and remain in perpetual servitude to the descendants of
the other two."

12th.--we returned to our former quarters, the village of salawe; but
i did not enjoy such repose as on the former visit, for the people
were in their cups, and, _nolens volens_, persisted in entering my
hut. sometimes i rose and drove them out, at other times i turned
round and feigned to sleep; but these manoeuvres were of no avail;
still they poured in, and one old man, more impudent than the rest,
understanding the trick, seized my pillow by the end, and, tugging at
it as a dog pulls at a quarter of horse, roused me with loud impatient
"whu-hu" and "hi, hi's," until at last, out of patience, i sent my
boots whirling at his head. this cleared the room, but only for a
moment: the boisterous, impudent crowd, true to savage nature,
enjoying the annoyance they had occasioned, returned exultingly, with
shouts and grins, in double numbers.

the beluches then interfered, and, in their zeal to keep order,
irritated some drunkards, who at once became pugnacious. on seeing the
excited state of these drunkards, bawling and stepping about in long,
sudden, and rapid strides, with brandished spears and agitated bows,
endeavouring to exasperate the rest of the mob against us, i rose, and
going out before them, said that i came forth for their satisfaction,
and that they might now stand and gaze as long as they liked; but i
hoped, as soon as their legs and arms were tired, that they would
depart in peace. the words acted with magical effect upon them; they
urgently requested me to retire again, but finding that i did not,
they took themselves homewards. the sultan arrived late in the
evening, he said from a long distance, on purpose to see me, and was
very importunate in his desire for my halting a day. as i had paid all
the other sultans the compliment of a visit, he should consider it a
slight if i did not stay a little while with him. on the occasion of
my passing northwards he had been absent, and could not entertain me;
so i must now accept a bullock, which he would send for on the morrow.
a long debate ensued, which ended by my giving him one shukka merikani
and one dhoti kiniki.

13th.--travelling through the nindo wilderness to-day, the beluches
were very much excited at the quantity of game they saw; but though
they tried their best, they did not succeed in killing any. troops of
zebras, and giraffe, some varieties of antelopes roaming about in
large herds, a buffalo and one ostrich, were the chief visible tenants
of this wild. we saw the fresh prints of a very large elephant; and i
have no doubt that by any sportsman, if he had but leisure to learn
their haunts and watering-places, a good account might be made of
them--but one and all are wild in the extreme. ostrich-feathers bedeck
the frizzly polls of many men and women, but no one has ever heard of
any having been killed or snared by huntsmen. these ornaments, as well
as the many skulls and skins seen in every house, are said to be found
lying about in places where the animals have died a natural death.

14th.--we left, as we did yesterday, an hour before dawn, and crossed
the second broad wilderness to kahama. at 9 a.m. i called the usual
halt to eat my rural breakfast of cold fowl, sour curd, cakes, and
eggs, in a village on the south border of the desert. as the houses
were devoid of all household commodities, i asked the people stopping
there to tend the fields to explain the reason, and learnt that their
fear of the plundering wamanda was such that they only came there
during the day to look after their crops, and at night they retired to
some distant place of safe retreat in the jungles, where they stored
all their goods and chattels. these people, in time of war, thus
putting everything useful out of the way of the forager's prying eyes,
it is very seldom that blood is spilt. this country being full of
sweet springs, accounts for the denseness of the population and
numberless herds of cattle. to look upon its resources, one is struck
with amazement at the waste of the world: if instead of this district
being in the hands of its present owners, it were ruled by a few
scores of europeans, what an entire revolution a few years would bring
forth! an extensive market would be opened to the world, the present
nakedness of the land would have a covering, and industry and commerce
would clear the way for civilisation and enlightenment.

at present the natural inert laziness and ignorance of the people is
their own and their country's bane. they are all totally unaware of
the treasures at their feet. this dreadful sloth is in part engendered
by the excessive bounty of the land in its natural state; by the
little want of clothes or other luxuries, in consequence of the
congenial temperature; and from the people having no higher object in
view than the first-coming meal, and no other stimulus to exertion by
example or anything else. the great cause, however, is their want of a
strong protecting government to preserve peace, without which nothing
can prosper. thus they are, both morally and physically, little better
than brutes, and as yet there is no better prospect in store for them.
the climate is a paradox quite beyond my solving, unless the numerous
and severe maladies that we all suffered from, during the first eight
months of our explorations, may be attributed to too much exposure;
and even that does not solve the problem. to all appearance, the whole
of the country to the westward of the east coast range is high, dry,
and healthy. no unpleasant exhalations pollute the atmosphere; there
are no extremes of temperature; the air is neither too hot nor too
cold; and a little care in hutting, dressing, and diet should obviate
any evil effects of exposure. springs of good water, and wholesome
food, are everywhere obtainable. flies and mosquitoes, the great
indian pests, are scarcely known, and the tsetse of the south nowhere
exists. during the journey northwards, i always littered down in a hut
at night; but the ticks bit me so hard, and the anxiety to catch stars
between the constantly-fleeting clouds, to take their altitudes,
perhaps preying on my mind, kept me many whole nights consecutively
without obtaining even as much as one wink of sleep--a state of things
i had once before suffered from. but there really was no assignable
cause for this, unless weakness or feverishness could create
wakefulness, and then it would seem surprising that even during the
day, or after much fatigue, i rarely felt the slightest inclination to
close my eyes. now, on returning, without anything to excite the mind,
and having always pitched the tent at night, i enjoyed cooler nights
and perfect rest. of diseases, the more common are remittent and
intermittent fevers, and these are the most important ones to avoid,
since they bring so many bad effects after them. in the first place,
they attack the brain, and often deprive one of his senses. then there
is no rallying from the weakness they produce. a little attack, which
one would only laugh at in india, prostrates you for a week or more,
and this weakness brings on other disorders: cramp, for instance, of
the most painful kind, very often follows. when lying in bed, my toes
have sometimes curled round and looked me in the face; at other times,
when i have put my hand behind my back, it has stuck there until, with
the other hand, i have seized the contracted muscles, and warmed the
part affected with the natural heat, till, relaxation taking place, i
was able to get it back. another nasty thing is the blindness which i
have already described, and which attacked another of our party in a
manner exactly similar to my complaint. he, like myself, left africa
with a misty veil floating before his eyes.

there are other disorders, but so foreign to my experience that i dare
not venture to describe them. for as doctors disagree about the
probable causes of their appearance, i most likely would only mislead
if i tried to account for them. however, i think i may safely say they
emanate from general debility, produced by the much-to-be-dreaded
fevers.

15th.--the caravan broke ground at 4 p.m., and, completing the
principal zigzag made to avoid wars, arrived at senagongo. kanoni,
followed by a host of men, women, and children, advanced to meet the
caravan, all roaringly intoxicated with joy, and lavishing greetings
of welcome, with showers of "yambo, yambo sanas" ("how are you?" and,
"very well, i hope?") which we as warmly returned: the shakings of
hands were past number, and the beluches and bombay could scarcely be
seen under the hot embraces and sharp kisses of admiring damsels. when
recovered from the shock of this great outburst of feelings, kanoni
begged me to fire a few shots, to apprise his enemies, and especially
his big brother, of the honours paid him. no time was lost: i no
sooner gave the order than bang, bang went every one of the escort's
guns, and the excited crowd, immediately seeing a supposed antagonist
in the foreground, rushed madly after him. then spears were
flourished, thrust, stabbed, and withdrawn; arrows were pointed, huge
shields protected black bodies, sticks and stones flew like hail; then
there was a slight retreat, then another advance--dancing to one side,
then to the other--jumping and prancing on the same ground, with
bodies swaying here and bodies swaying there, until at length the
whole foreground was a mass of moving objects, all springs and hops,
like an army of frogs, after the first burst of rain, advancing to a
pond: then again the guns went off, giving a fresh impulse to the
exciting exercise.

their great principle in their warfare appears to be, that no one
should be still. at each report of the guns, fresh enemies were
discovered retreating, and the numbers of their slain were quite
surprising. these, as they dropped, were, with highly dramatic action,
severally and immediately trampled down and knelt upon, and hacked and
chopped repeatedly with knives, whilst the slayer continued showing
his savage wrath by worrying his supposed victim with all the angry
energy that dogs display when fighting. this triumphal entry over,
kanoni led us into his boma, and treated us with sour curd. then, at
my request, he assembled his principal men and greatest travellers to
debate upon the n'yanza. one old man, shrivelled by age, stated that
he had travelled up the western shores of the n'yanza two moons (sixty
days) consecutively, had passed beyond karague into a country where
coffee grows abundantly, and is called muanye. he described the shrub
as standing between two and three feet high, having the stem nearly
naked, but much branched above; it grows in large plantations, and
forms the principal article of food. the people do not boil and drink
it as we do, but eat the berry raw, with its husk on. the arabs are
very fond of eating these berries raw, and have often given us some.
they bring them down from uganda, where, for a pennyworth of beads, a
man can have his fill.

when near these coffee plantations, he (our informer) visited an
island on the lake, called kitiri, occupied by the watiri, a naked lot
of beings, who subsist almost entirely on fish and coffee. the watiri
go about in large canoes like the tanganyika ones; but the
sea-travelling, he says, is very dangerous. in describing the
boisterous nature of the lake, he made a rumbling, gurgling noise in
his throat, which he increased and diversified by pulling and tapping
at the skin covering the apple, and by puffing and blowing with great
vehemence indicated extraordinary roughness of the elements. the sea
itself, he said, was boundless. kanoni now told me that the muingira
nullah lies one day's journey n.n.w. of this, and drains the western
side of the msalala district into the southern end of the n'yanza
creek. it is therefore evident that those extensive lays in the nindo
and salawe districts which we crossed extend down to this periodical
river, which accounts for there being so many wild animals there:
water being such an attractive object in these hot climes, all animals
group round it. kanoni is a dark, square, heavy-built man, very fond
of imbibing pombe, and, like many tipplers, overflowing with
human-kindness, especially in his cups. he kept me up several hours
to-night, trying to induce me to accept a bullock, and to eat it in
his boma, in the same manner as i formerly did with his brother. he
was much distressed because i would not take the half of my
requirements in cattle from him, instead of devoting everything to his
brother kurua; and not till i assured him i could not stay, but
instead would leave bombay and some beluches with cloth to purchase
some cows from his people, would he permit of my turning in to rest.
it is strange to see how very soon, when questioning these negroes
about anything relating to geography, their weak brains give way, and
they can answer no questions, or they become so evasive in their
replies, or so rambling, that you can make nothing out of them. it is
easily discernible at what time you should cease to ask any further
questions; for their heads then roll about like a ball upon a wire,
and their eyes glass over and look vacantly about as though vitality
had fled from their bodies altogether. bombay, though, is a singular
exception to this rule; but then, by long practice, he has become a
great geographer, and delights in pointing out the different features
on my map to his envying neighbours.

16th.--we came to mgogua this morning, and were received by kurua with
his usual kind affability. our entrance to his boma was quiet and
unceremonious, for we came there quite unexpectedly--hardly giving him
time to prepare his musket and return our salute. though we were
allowed a ready admission, a guinea-fowl i shot on the way was not.
the superstitious people forbade its entrance in full plumage, so it
was plucked before being brought inside the palisade. kurua again
arranged a hut for my residence, and was as assiduous as ever in his
devotion to my comforts. all the elders of the district soon arrived,
and the usual debates commenced. kurua chiefly trades with karague and
the northern kingdoms, but no one could add to the information i had
already obtained. one of his men stated that he had performed the
journey between pangani on the east coast of africa and the n'yanza
three times, in about two months each time. the distance was very
great for the little time it took him; but then he had to go for his
life the whole way, in consequence of the masai, or wahuma, as some
call them, being so inimical to strangers of any sort that he dare not
stop or talk anywhere on the way.[71] on leaving pangani, he passed
through usumbara, and entered on the country of the warring nomadic
race, the masai; through their territories he travelled without
halting until he arrived at usukuma, bordering on the lake. his fear
and speed were such that he did not recognise any other tribes or
countries besides those enumerated.

wishing to ascertain what number of men a populous country like this
could produce in case of an attack, and to gain some idea of savage
tactics, i proposed having a field-day. kurua was delighted with the
idea, and began roaring and laughing about it with his usual
boisterous energy, to the great admiration of all the company. the
programme was as follows:--at 3 p.m. on the 17th, kurua and his
warriors, all habited and drawn up in order of battle, were to occupy
the open space in front of the village, whilst my party of beluches,
suddenly issuing from the village, would personate the enemy and
commence the attack. this came off at the appointed time, and
according to orders the forces were drawn up, and an engagement
ensued. the beluches, rushing through the passages of the palisaded
village, suddenly burst upon the enemy, and fired and charged
successively; to which the wamanda replied with equal vigour,
advancing with their frog-like leaps and bounds, dodging and
squatting, and springing and flying in the most wild and fantastic
manner; stabbing with their spears, protecting with their shields,
poising with bows and arrows pointed, and, mingling with the beluches,
rushed about striking at and avoiding their guns and sabres. but all
was so similar to the senagongo display that it does not require a
further description. the number of kurua's forces disappointed me,--i
fear the intelligence of the coming parade did not reach far. the
dresses they wore did credit to their nation--some were decked with
cock-tail plumes, others wore bunches of my guinea-fowl's feathers in
their hair, whilst the chiefs and swells were attired in long red
baize mantles, consisting of a strip of cloth four feet by twenty
inches, at one end of which they cut a slit to admit the head, and
allowed the remainder to hang like a tail behind the back. their
spears and bows are of a very ordinary kind, and the shield is
constructed something like the kafir's, from a long strip of bull's
hide, which is painted over with ochreish earth. the fight over, all
hands rushed to the big drums in the cow-yard, and began beating them
as though they deserved a drubbing: this "sweet music" set everybody
on wires in a moment, and dancing never ceased till the sun went down,
and the cows usurped the revelling-place. kurua now gave me a good
milch cow and calf, and promised two more of the same stamp. those
which were brought by the common people were mere weeds, and dry
withal; they would not bring any good ones, i think, from fear of the
sultan's displeasure, lest i should prefer theirs to his, and deprive
him of the consequent profits. my chief reason for leaving bombay
behind at senagongo was, that business was never done when i was
present. for, besides staring at me all day, the people speculated how
to make the most of the chance offered by a rich man coming so
suddenly amongst them, and in consequence of this avariciousness
offered their cattle at such unreasonable prices as to preclude the
transaction of any business.

18th.--halt. my anticipations about the way of getting cows proved
correct, for bombay brought twelve animals, which cost twenty-three
dhotis merikani and nine dhotis kiniki. kurua now gave me another cow
and calf, and promised me two more when we arrived at the ukumbi
district, as he did not like thinning one herd too much. i gave in
return for his present one barsati, five dhotis merikani and two
dhotis kiniki, with a promise of some gunpowder when we arrived at
unyanyembe, for he was still bent on going there with me. perhaps i
may consider my former obstruction in travel by kurua a fortunate
circumstance; for though the eldest brother's residence lay directly
in my way, he might not possess so kind a nature as these two younger
brothers.

still i cannot see any good reason for the kirangozi abandoning the
proper road: there certainly could be no more danger on the one side
than on the other, and all would have been equally glad to have had
me. it is true that i should have had to pass through his enemies'
hands to the other brother, and such a course usually excites
suspicion; but, by the usual custom of the country, kurua should have
been treated by him only as a rebellious subject, for though all three
brothers were by different mothers, they are considered in line of
succession as ours are, when legitimately begotten by one mother. some
time ago the eldest brother made a tool of an arab trader, and with
that force on his side threatened these two brothers with immediate
destruction unless they resigned to him the entire government, and his
rights as senior. they admitted in his presence the justness of his
words and the folly of waging war, as such a measure could only bring
destruction on all alike; but on his departure they carried on their
rule as before.

bombay, talking figuratively with me, considers kurua's stopping me
something like the use the monkey turned the cat's paw to; that is, he
stopped me simply to enhance his dignity, and gain the minds of the
people by leading them to suppose i saw justice in his actions.
pombe-brewing, the chief occupation of the women, is as regular here
as the revolution of day and night, and the drinking of it just as
constant. it is prepared from bajeri and jowari (common millets): the
first step in the manufacture is malting in the same way as we do
barley; then they range a double street of sticks, usually in the
middle of the village, fill a number of pots with these grains mixed
in water, which they place in continuous line down the street of
sticks, and, setting fire to the whole at once, boil away until the
mess is fit to put aside for refining: this they then do, leaving the
pots standing three days, when fermentation takes place and the liquor
is fit to drink. it has the strength of labourers' beer, and both
sexes drink it alike. this fermented beverage resembles pig-wash, but
is said to be so palatable and satisfying--for the dregs and all are
drunk together--that many entirely subsist upon it. it is a great help
to the slave-masters, for without it they could get nobody to till
their ground; and when the slaves are required to turn the earth, the
master always sits in judgment with lordly dignity, generally under a
tree, watching to see who becomes entitled to a drop.

in the evening my attention was attracted by small processions of men
and women, possessed of the phepo, or demon, passing up the palisaded
streets, turning into the different courts, and paying each and every
house by turns a visit. the party advanced in slow funereal order,
with gently springing, mincing, jogging action, some holding up twigs,
others balancing open baskets of grain and tools on their heads, and
with their bodies, arms, and heads in unison with the whole
hobbling-bobling motion, kept in harmony to a low, mixed, droning,
humming chorus. as the sultan's door was approached, he likewise rose,
and, mingling in the crowd, performed the same evolutions.

this kind of procession is common at zanzibar: when any demoniacal
possessions take place among the blacks, it is by this means they cast
out devils. while on the subject of superstition, it may be worth
mentioning what long ago struck me as a singular instance of the
effect of supernatural impression on the uncultivated mind. during
boyhood my old nurse used to tell me with great earnestness of a
wonderful abortion shown about in the _fairs_ of england--a child born
with a pig's head; and as solemnly declared that this freak of nature
was attributable to the child's mother having taken fright at a pig
when in the interesting stage. the case i met in this country was
still more far-fetched, for the abortion was supposed to be producible
by indirect influence on the wife of the husband taking fright. on
once shooting a pregnant doe waterboc, i directed my native huntsman,
a married man, to dissect her womb and expose the embryo; but he
shrank from the work with horror, fearing lest the sight of the kid,
striking his mind, should have an influence on his wife's future
bearing, by metamorphosing her progeny to the likeness of a fawn.

19th.--we bade kurua adieu in the early morning, as a caravan of his
had just arrived from karague, and appointed to meet at the second
station, as marching with cattle would be slow work for him. our march
lasted nine miles. the succeeding day we passed ukumbi, and arrived at
uyombo. on the way i was obliged to abandon one of the donkeys, as he
was completely used up. this made up our thirty-second loss in asses
since leaving zanzibar. my load of beads was now out, and i had to
purchase rations with cloth--a necessary measure, but not economical,
for the cloth does not go half as far as beads of the same value. i
have remarked throughout this trip, that in all places where arabs are
not much in the habit of trading, very few cloths find their way, and
in consequence the people take to wearing beads; and beads and baubles
are the only foreign things much in requisition.

as remarks upon the relative value of commodities appear in various
places in this diary, i shall endeavour to give a general idea how it
is that i have found this plentiful country--quite beyond any other i
have seen in africa in fertility and stock--so comparatively dear to
travel in. the zanzibar route to ujiji is now so constantly travelled
over by arabs and wasuahili, that the people, seeing the caravans
approach, erect temporary markets, or come hawking things for sale,
and the prices are adapted to the abilities of the purchasers; and at
such markets our sheikh bought for us, and transacted all business. it
is also to be observed that where things are brought for sale, they
are invariably cheaper than in those places where one has to seek and
ask for them; for in the one instance a livelihood is the consequence
of trade, whereas in the other a chance purchaser is treated as a
windfall to be made the most of. now this line is just the opposite to
the ujiji one, and therefore dear; but added to those influences here,
the sultans, to increase their own importance whilst having me their
guest, invariably gave out that i was no peddling arab or msuahili,
but a great mundewa, or merchant prince of the wazungu (white or wise
men), and the people took the hint to make me pay or starve. then
again, not having the sheikh with me, i had to pay for and settle
everything myself; and from having no variety of beads in this
exclusively bead country, there was great inconvenience.

kurua now joined us, and reported the abandoned donkey dead. a cool
shower of rain fell, to the satisfaction of every thirsty soul. it is
delightful to observe the freshness which even one partial shower
imparts to all animated nature after a long-continued drought.




chapter v.

general character of the country traversed--the huts--the
geology--productions--land of promise--advice to missionaries--leave
ulekampuri--return of the expedition--register of temperature--wages
and kit.


24th august.--during the last four days we have marched fifty-eight
miles, and are now at our old village in ulekampuri. as we have now
traversed all the ground, i must try to give a short description, with
a few reflections on the general character of all we have seen or
heard, before concluding this diary.

to give a faithful idea of a country, it is better that the object
selected for comparison should incline to the large and grander scale
than to the reverse, otherwise the reader is apt to form too low an
idea of it. and yet, though this is leaning to the smaller, i can
think of no better comparison for the surface of this high land than
the long sweeping waves of the atlantic ocean; and where the hills are
fewest, and in lines, they resemble small breakers curling on the tops
of the rollers, all irregularly arranged, as though disturbed by
different currents of wind.

where the hills are grouped, they remind me of a small chopping sea in
the bristol channel. that the hills are nowhere high, is proved by the
total absence of any rivers along this line, until the lake is
reached; and the passages between or over them are everywhere gradual
in their rise; so that in travelling through the country, no matter in
which direction, the hills seldom interfere with the line of march.
the flats and hollows are well peopled, and cattle and cultivation are
everywhere abundant. the stone, soil, and aspect of the tract is
uniform throughout. the stone is chiefly granite, the rugged rocks of
which lie like knobs of sugar over the surface of the little hills,
intermingled with sandstone in a highly ferruginous state; whilst the
soil is an accumulation of sand the same colour as the stone, a light
brownish grey, and appears as if it were formed of disintegrated
particles of the rocks worn off by time and weathering. small trees
and brushwood cover all the outcropping hills; and palms on the
plains, though few and widely spread, prove that water is very near
the surface. springs, too, are numerous, and generally distributed.
the mean level of the country between unyanyembe and the lake is 3767
feet; that of the lake itself, 3750. the tribes, as a rule, are well
disposed towards all strangers, and wish to extend their commerce.
their social state rather represents a conservative than a radical
disposition; their government is a sort of semipatriarchal-feudal
arrangement; and, like a band of robbers, all hold by their different
chiefs from feeling the necessity of mutual support. bordering the
south of the lake there are vast fields of iron; cotton is also
abundant, and every tropical plant or tree could grow; those that do
exist, even rice, vegetate in the utmost luxuriance. cattle are very
abundant, and hides are found in every house. on the east of the lake
ivory is said to be very abundant and cheap; and on the west we hear
of many advantages which are especially worthy of our notice. the
karague hills overlooking the lake are high, cold, and healthy, and
have enormous droves of cattle, bearing horns of stupendous size; and
ivory, fine timber, and all the necessaries of life, are to be found
in great profusion there. again, beyond the equator, of the kingdom of
uganda we hear from everybody a rapturous account. that country
evidently swarms with people who cultivate coffee and all the common
grains, and have large flocks and herds, even greater than what i have
lately seen. now if the n'yanza be really the nile's fount, which i
sincerely believe to be the case, what an advantage this will be to
the english merchant on the nile, and what a field is opened to the
world, if england does not neglect this discovery!

but i must not expatiate too much on the merits and capabilities of
this part of inner africa, lest i mislead any commercial inquirers;
and it is as well to say at present, that the people near the coast
are in such a state of helplessness and insecurity, caused by the
slave-hunts, that for many years, until commerce, by steady and
certain advance, shall in some degree overcome the existing apathy,
and excite the population to strive to better their position by
setting up strong constitutions to protect themselves and their
property, no one need expect to make a large fortune by dealing with
them. that commerce does make wonderful improvements on the barbarous
habits of the africans, can now be seen in the masai country, and the
countries extending north-westward from mombas up through kikuyu into
the interior, where the process has been going on during the last few
years. there even the roving wild pastorals, formerly untamable, are
now gradually becoming reduced to subjection; and they no doubt will
ere long have as strong a desire for cloths and other luxuries as any
other civilised beings, from the natural desire to equal in comfort
and dignity of appurtenances those whom they now must see constantly
passing through their country. caravans are penetrating farther, and
going in greater numbers, every succeeding year, in those directions,
and arab merchants say that those countries are everywhere healthy.
the best proof we have that the district is largely productive is the
fact that the caravans and competition increase on those lines more
and more every day. i would add, that in the meanwhile the staple
exports derived from the far interior of the continent will consist of
ivory, hides, and horns; whilst from the coast and its vicinity the
clove, the gum copal, some textile materials drawn from the banana,
aloe, and pine-apples, with oleaginous plants such as the ground-nut
and cocoa-nut, are the chief exportable products. the cotton plant
which grows here, judging from its size and difference from the plant
usually grown in india, i consider to be a tree cotton and a
perennial. it is this cotton which the natives weave into coarse
fabrics in their looms. rice, although it is not indigenous to africa,
i believe is certainly capable of being produced in great quantity and
of very superior quality; and this is also the case with sugar-cane
and tobacco, both of which are grown generally over the continent.
there is also a species of palm growing on the borders of the
tanganyika lake, which yields a concrete oil very much like, if not
the same as, the palm-oil of western africa; but this is limited in
quantity, and would never be of much value. salt, which is found in
great quantity in pits near the malagarazi river, and the iron i have
already spoken about, could only be of use to the country itself in
facilitating traffic, and in maturing its resources.

these fertile regions have been hitherto unknown from the same cause
which dr livingstone has so ably explained in regard to the western
side of africa--the jealousy of the shortsighted people who live on
the coast, who, to preserve a monopoly of one particular article
exclusively to themselves (ivory), have done their best to keep
everybody away from the interior. i say shortsighted; for it is
obvious that, were the resources of the country once fairly opened,
the people on the coast would double or triple their present incomes,
and zanzibar would soon swell into a place of real importance. all
hands would then be employed, and luxury would take the place of
beggary.

i must now (after expressing a fervent hope that england especially,
and the civilised world generally, will not neglect this land of
promise) call attention to the marked fact, that the missionaries,
residing for many years at zanzibar, are the prime and first promoters
of this discovery. they have been for years past doing their utmost,
with simple sincerity, to christianise this negro land, and promote a
civilised and happy state of existence among these benighted beings.
during their sojourn among these blackamoors, they heard from arabs
and others of many of the facts i have now stated, but only in a
confused way, such as might be expected in information derived from an
uneducated people. amongst the more important disclosures made by the
arabs was the constant reference to a large lake or inland sea, which
their caravans were in the habit of visiting. it was a singular thing
that, at whatever part of the coast the missionaries arrived, on
inquiring from the travelling merchants where they went to, they one
and all stated to an inland sea, the dimensions of which were such
that nobody could give any estimate of its length or width. the
directions they travelled in pointed north-west, west, and south-west,
and their accounts seemed to indicate a single sheet of water,
extending from the line down to 14o south latitude--a sea of about 840
miles in length, with an assumed breadth of two to three hundred
miles. in fact, from this great combination of testimony that water
lay generally in a continuous line from the equator up to 14o south
latitude, and from not being able to gain information of there being
any land separations to the said water, they very naturally, and i may
add fortunately, put upon the map that monster slug of an inland sea
which so much attracted the attention of the geographical world in
1855-56, and caused our being sent out to africa. the good that may
result from this little, yet happy accident, will, i trust, prove
proportionately as large and fruitful as the produce from the
symbolical grain of mustard-seed; and nobody knows or believes in this
more fully than one of the chief promoters of this exciting
investigation, mr rebmann. from these late explorations, he feels
convinced, as he has oftentimes told me, that the first step has been
taken in the right direction for the development of the commercial
resources of the country, the spread of civilisation, and the
extension of our geographical knowledge.

as many clergymen, missionaries, and others, have begged me to publish
what facilities are open to the better prosecution of their noble ends
in this wild country, i would certainly direct their attention to the
karague district, in preference to any other. there they will find, i
feel convinced, a fine healthy country; a choice of ground from the
mountain-top to the level of the lake, capable of affording them every
comfort of life which an isolated place can produce; and being the
most remote region from the coast, they would have less interference
from the mohammedan communities that reside by the sea. but then, i
think, missionaries would have but a poor chance of success unless
they went there in a body, with wives and families all as assiduous in
working to the same end as themselves, and all capable of other useful
occupations besides that of disseminating the gospel, which should
come after, and not before, the people are awake and prepared to
receive it. as that country must be cold in consequence of its great
altitude, the people would much sooner than in the hotter and more
enervating lowlands, learn any lessons of industry they might be
taught. to live idle in regard to everything but endeavouring to cram
these negroes with scriptural doctrines, as has too often been and now
is done, is, although apparently the straightest, the longest way to
reach the goal of their desires.

the missionary, i think, should be a jack-of-all-trades--a man that
can turn his hand to anything; and being useful in all cases, he
would, at any rate, make himself influential with those who were
living around him. to instruct him is the surest way of gaining a
black man's heart, which, once obtained, can easily be turned in any
way the preceptor pleases, as is the case with all asiatics: they soon
learn to bow to the superior intellect of the european, and are as
easily ruled as a child is by his father.[72]

25th.--we left ulekampuri at 1 a.m., and marched the last eighteen
miles into kaze under the delightful influence of a cool night and a
bright full moon. as the caravan, according to its usual march of
single file, moved along the serpentine footpath in peristaltic
motion, firing muskets and singing "the return," the unyanyembe
villagers, men, women, and children, came running out and flocking on
it, piercing the air with loud shrill noises, accompanied with the
lullabooing of these fairs--which, once heard, can never be mistaken.
the crowd was composed in great part of the relatives of my porters,
who evinced their feelings towards their adult masters as eagerly as
stray deer do in running to join a long-missing herd. the arabs, one
and all, came out to meet us, and escorted us into their depot.
captain burton greeted me on arrival at the old house, and said he had
been very anxious for some time past about our safety, as numerous
reports had been set afloat with regard to the civil wars we had had
to circumvent, which had impressed the arabs as well as himself with
alarming fears. i laughed over the matter, but expressed my regret
that he did not accompany me, as i felt quite certain in my mind i had
discovered the source of the nile. this he naturally objected to, even
after hearing all my reasons for saying so, and therefore the subject
was dropped. nevertheless, the captain accepted all my geography
leading from kaze to the nile, and wrote it down in his
book--contracting only my distances, which he said he thought were
exaggerated, and of course taking care to sever my lake from the nile
by _his_ mountains of the moon.

it affords me great pleasure to be able to report the safe return of
the expedition in a state of high spirits and gratification. all
enjoyed the salubrity of the climate, the kind entertainments of the
sultans, the variety and richness of the country, and the excellent
fare everywhere. further, the beluches, by their exemplary conduct,
proved themselves a most efficient, willing, and trustworthy guard,
and are deserving of the highest encomiums; they, with bombay, were
the life and success of everything, and i sincerely hope they may not
be forgotten.

the arabs told me i could reach the n'yanza in fifteen to seventeen
marches, and i returned in sixteen, although i had to take a
circuitous line instead of a direct one. the provisions, too, just
held out. i took a supply for six weeks, and completed _that_ time
_this_ day. the total road-distance there and back is 452 miles,
which, admitting that the arabs make sixteen marches of it, gives them
a marching rate of more than fourteen miles a- day.

the temperature is greater at this than at any other time of the year,
in consequence of its being the end of the dry season; still, as will
be seen by the annexed register of one week, the unyamuezi plateau is
not unbearably hot.




  thermometer hung in a passage of our house showed--morning, noon,
                  and afternoon respectively--

  6 a.m.  9 a.m.  noon.  3 p.m.  6 p.m.
  73o     75o     84o     86o     84o     mean temperature during
                                          first week or seven days
                                          of september 1858.
  71o     ---     ---     88o     ---     extreme: difference, 17o
                                          of variation during 12
                                          hours of day.


  thermometer suspended from ridge-pole of a one-cloth tent pitched
                       in a close yard:--

  6 a.m.  9 a.m.  noon.  3 p.m.  6 p.m.
  65o     85o     108o   107o    80o      mean temperature.
  63o     ---     ---    113o    ---      extreme: difference, 50o
                                           of variation.

                list of stores along this line.

rice is grown at unyanyembe, or wherever the arabs settle, but is not
common, as the negroes, considering it poor food, seldom eat it.


animal.

cows, sheep, goats, fowls, donkeys, eggs, milk, butter, honey.
p.s.--donkeys are very scarce; only found in a few places in the
unyamuezi country.


vegetable.

rice, jowari, bagri, maize, manioc, sweet potatoes, yams, pumpkins,
melons, cucumbers, tobacco, cotton, pulse in great varieties, chilis,
benghans, plantains, tomatoes, sesamum.


the quantity of kit taken for this journey consisted of--

  9 gorahs merikani; 1 gorah or piece of american sheeting, = 15
                cloths of 4 cubits each.
  30  do. kiniki; 1 gorah kiniki, a common indigo-dyed stuff, = 4
                cloths of 4 cubits each.
  1 sahari, a coloured cloth.   | these cloths are more expensive being of
  1 dubuani, a coloured cloth.  | better stuff, and are used chiefly by the
  2 barsati, a coloured cloth.  | sultans and other black swells.


  20 maunds white beads = 70 lb.
  3 loads of rice grown at unyanyembe by the arabs.


expenditure for the journey from 9th july to 25th august 1858.

                                                            value.
  10 beluches' wages, 150 shukkas, or 4 cubits apiece
     merikani,                                            100 dols.
  10 beluches' rations, given in advance, 30 lb. white
     beads,                                                 5
  15 pagazis' wages, 75 shukkas merikani,                  50
  26 men, including self, rations, 60 lb. white beads,     10
  2 pagazis, extra wages, 7 shukkas of merikani and
     kiniki  mixed,                                         5
  6 sultans' hongos or presents, 22 shukkas of merikani and
                        kiniki, mixed,                     16
  6   do.    do.        do.      2 barsatis,                2

  total expenditure,                                      188 dols.
                                                  or l39, 3s. 4d.


the indian government also very generously authorised me to pay, on my
last expedition, those poor men who had carried our property down from
kaze to zungomero; but unfortunately for them, as well as for our own
credit, i could not find one man of the lot.



the end.




                            notes


[1] without exception, and after having now shot over three quarters
of the globe, i can safely say, there does not exist any place in the
whole wide world which affords such a diversity of sport, such
interesting animals, or such enchanting scenery, as well as pleasant
climate and temperature, as these various countries of my first
experiences; but the more especially interesting was tibet to me, from
the fact that i was the first man who penetrated into many of its
remotest parts, and discovered many of its numerous animals.

[2] lieutenant burton received l100 from the royal geographical
society to cross africa from west to east, and whilst attempting that
journey he got drifted off with the flood of pilgrims to mecca. see
his book.

[3] i had then mapped tibet, and had laid down several new districts
which even to this day have not been trodden by any european but
myself.

[4] _wadi_, river or nullah.

[5] it is questionable whether or not these christians were driven
south, fought at mombas, were repulsed, and since have crossed the
nile to where we now find them, under the name of wahuma. people may
argue against the possibility of this, as the wahuma do not keep
horses; but the only reason, i believe, why they do not, is simply
because horses won't live in those rich regions.

[6] lieutenant cruttenden, in his geographical treatise, describes the
darud family as being divided into four tribes, and, in addition to
the three of which i heard, places the fourth or murreyhan in his map
to the southward of the country of ugahden, lying between his wadi
nogal and the webbe shebeli river.

[7] the somali, in their own country, consider the arab's gown and
trousers effeminate; so on return to africa they throw off the arab
costume again.

[8] this proved a great mistake. by having both men of the same tribe
for my entire dependence, they invariably acted in concert against me
like two brothers.

[9] akil, _plural okal_--chief or elder.

[10] the sultan has four sons.

[11] this gazelle is slightly different from the dorcas, and, i
believe, has never been obtained before.

[12] in talking of white men or europeans, the somali always say
english french, those two branches of the european community being all
they are acquainted with.

[13] tobe, properly _thobe_, the dress used by somali of both sexes.
it consists of a white cloth, eight cubits long, frequently adorned
with gaily-coloured edges; by the men it is worn loosely round the
body with the end thrown over the shoulder, very much like the roman
toga. the women gather it in folds round the waist, where it is
confined by a string, and both ends are fastened in a knot across the
breast.

[14] it may appear strange that these men would not accept anything
from me in payment except such things as they were accustomed to; and
many of the pretty baubles which i brought from calcutta, and
considered would allure them by their beauty, proved of no use here as
a medium of exchange.

[15] tug, in the somali language, signifies a periodical river, or
water-course, the same as wadi in arabic, and nullah in hindustani.

[16] _durbar_--eastern court.

[17] lions, as well as other large animals, are said to come into the
nogal during the rainy season, when water and grass are abundant.

[18] unfortunately, when sent on this mission, i was not furnished
with a chart, and had never seen any works written on the subject.

[19] for the advancement of future investigations, i would here notice
the reported existence of a large reptile like the armadillo--probably
a manis--which the somali think a very remarkable animal. it is said
by them to be common in haud, is very slow in motion, has a hard scaly
exterior coating, invulnerable to their spears, and capable of
supporting the weight of a man without any apparent inconvenience to
the creature who bears it.

[20] from the presence of these crosses, it would appear as though in
ignorance they had adopted the emblem of their christian predecessors.

[21] _ras_ means point or headland.

[22] this interesting little animal has since been compared by mr
blyth, curator of the asiatic society, calcutta, and determined to be
a new genus, and was named by him _pectinator spekei_.

[23] then changed to colonel coghlan.

[24] these notes were reported in an appendix in the 'first footsteps
in east africa,' by lieutenant burton, with his other reports of this
expedition.

[25] to say the least of it, this was a very dangerous policy to play
with a people who consider might right, and revenge to death.

[26] since this was written i have asked lieutenant-colonel playfair
his opinion on this matter, and the subjoined is the reply:--"in this
lieutenant burton erred; and this was the _termina causa_ of all the
mishaps which befell the expedition. the institution of abbanage is of
great antiquity, and is the representative amongst a barbarous people
of our customs laws, inasmuch as every trader or traveller pays to his
abban a certain percentage on the merchandise he buys or sells, and
even on the food he purchases for his own use.

"a traveller who hopes for success in exploring a new country must
accept the institutions he finds in existence; he can hardly hope, by
his simple _fiat_, to revolutionise the time-honoured and _most
profitable_ institutions of a people, amongst whom precedent is a law
as unchangeable as that of the medes and persians."

[27] siyareh, a fort and small village belonging to the makahil branch
of the habr awel, is the watering-place of berbera, and derives a
small revenue from the boats which touch there _en route_ to, and
returning from, the berbera fair. during this year it attained an
unenviable notoriety as the rendezvous for the slaves intended for
export to the persian gulf. many of these were free somali girls, sold
by their relatives or kidnapped by their friends. colonel playfair
wrote to me that one hundred and forty boys and girls were rescued
here in the early part of this year by h.m.s. lady canning.

[28] colonel playfair thinks 20,000 men nearer the right number.

[29] i must here notice, although i have endeavoured to stick as
closely as possible to the narration of my own story in these pages,
that i saw herne, who had been guarding the rear, opposed to the whole
brunt of the attack, fighting gallantly with his sable antagonists;
and from the resolution with which he fired at them, he must have done
some damage.

[30] articles of peace and friendship concluded between the habr owel
tribe of somali on the one part, and brigadier william marcus coghlan,
political resident at aden, on behalf of the honourable east india
company, on the other.

"whereas, on the 19th of april 1855 (corresponding with the 1st of
shaban 1271), a treacherous attack and murder were perpetrated at the
port of berbera by a party of habr owel tribe, upon a party of british
officers, about to travel in that country with the consent and under
the protection of the elders of the tribe, in consequence of which
outrage certain demands were made by the government of india, and
enforced by a blockade of the habr owel coast; and whereas it has
become apparent that the said tribe has fulfilled these conditions to
the utmost of its ability, and has prayed to be relieved from the
blockade; therefore it is agreed,--

"1st, that the elders of the habr owel will use their best endeavours
to deliver up ou ali, the murderer of lieutenant stroyan.

"2d, that, until this be accomplished, the sub-tribe esa moosa, which
now shelters, and any other tribe which may hereafter shelter,
harbour, or protect the said ou ali, shall be debarred from coming to
aden.

"3d, that all vessels sailing under the british flag shall have free
permission to trade at the port of berbera, or at any other place in
the territories of the habr owel; and that all british subjects shall
enjoy perfect safety in every part of the said territories, and shall
be permitted to trade or travel there under the protection of the
elders of the tribe. in like manner shall the members of the habr owel
tribe enjoy similar privileges at aden, or in any other part of the
british possessions.

"4th, the traffic in slaves through the habr owel territories,
including the port of berbera, shall cease for ever; and any slave or
slaves who, contrary to this engagement, shall be introduced into the
said territories, shall be delivered up to the british; and the
commander of any vessel of her majesty's or the honourable east india
company's navy shall have the power of demanding the surrender of such
slave or slaves, and of supporting the demand by force of arms, if
necessary.

"5th, the political resident at aden shall have the power to send an
agent to reside at berbera during the season of the fair, should he
deem such a course necessary, to see that the provisions of this
agreement are observed; and such agent will be treated with the
respect and consideration due to the british government.

"6th, that on a solemn promise being given by the elders of the habr
owel, faithfully to abide by the articles of this agreement, and to
cause the rest of the tribe to do so likewise, and to deliver up to
the political resident at aden any party who may violate it, the
blockade of the habr owel coast shall be raised, and perpetual peace
and friendship shall exist between the british and the habr owel.

"done at berbera this seventh day of november, one thousand eight
hundred and fifty-six of the christian era (corresponding with the
eighth day of rabea-el-owel, one thousand two hundred and seventy-two
of the hejira).

    (signed)  mahomed arra'leh,  \
    (signed)  ahmed ali bookeri,  | ayal yoonus.
    (signed)  noor fa'rrah,      /

    (signed)  ahmed gha'lid,     \
    (signed)  mahommed wa'is,     | ayal ahmed
    (signed)  muggan mahommed,   /

    (signed)  rooblie hassan,    \
    (signed)  ateyah hilder,      | makahil.
    (signed)  farrah beni'n,     /

    (signed)  awadth shermarkie,   ayal hamood.

  "signed in my presence at berbera, on the 7th november 1856.

  (signed)  r. l. playfair, assistant political resident, aden.
  (signed)  w. m. coghlan, political resident.

  "aden, 9th november 1856.

"ratified by the right honourable the governor-general of india in
council, at fort william, this 23d day of january 1857.

    (signed) canning.
    and five members of council of india."

[31] i was first blinded by ophthalmia when a child, which had ever
since rendered reading a very painful task; and again i suffered from
snow-blindness whilst crossing over the himalayas into tibet.

[32] the cheque, i found, after my arrival in england, was not
credited in my account, so i had, after all, to pay my own passage.

[33] i must add here, to show that the generous hospitality of the
indian navy was now as strong in force as ever it was, that the
wardroom officers, not being aware of the intended generosity of the
government to supply us with messing gratis, had laid in an extra
store of provisions for the purpose of making us their guests.

[34] banyans are the only class of coloured men who have the ability
to be accountants. they fill this office properly, and are therefore
always selected for it.

[35] on starting to the rescue, my companion complained of the shock
his nerves had received since the somali encounter, and this appeared
to affect him during the whole of this journey.

[36] caravans have also reached the shores of the n'yanza at 1o s.
 lat., and entered usoga, rounding its north-east corner.

[37] see further description of this, page 185.

[38] see bombay's history, page 210.

[39] in future i shall call this fringe or mountain-chain the east
coast range, in contradistinction to the same hill-formation on the
western coast of africa; for it must be remembered that there are
three great leading features in the geographical formation of
africa--viz., a low exterior belt of land, or margin to the continent,
varying in breadth according to circumstances, which is succeeded by a
high belt of mountains or rugged ground, separating the lowlands from
a high interior plateau, lying like a basin within the fringe of
hills.

[40] the officers of state cannot receive a present without the
sanction of the government.

[41] the murderers of dr boscher were sent to zanzibar by the chief of
their tribe, and were executed by orders of the sultan.

[42] to save repetition, i may as well mention the fact that neither
captain burton nor myself were able to converse in any african
language until we were close to the coast on the return journey.

[43] another question suggests itself. how did ptolemy hear of the two
lakes which he considered were the sources of the nile? it is obvious
he could not have done so by the channel of the nile, for the
anthropophagi barred all communication in that direction. here,
however, the route from zanzibar to the tanganyika lake and the
victoria n'yanza, in all probability, was kept open by the trading
"men of the moon;" and thus two lakes were heard of situated east and
west of one another, just in convenient situations to fit on to the
two branches of ptolemy's nile.

[44] _khambi_--encampment.

[45] the babisa purchase ivory at luwemba for the kilua merchants, and
are met there by the kaze merchants.

[46] i have since heard from colonel rigby (colonel hamerton's
successor) that hamed and all his slaves were murdered on their
journey to uruwa, and their property was seized by the natives.

[47] here is the confusion again of the nile and the lake as one
water. the nile was in reality five marches east of kibuga, and the
boundary of the lake one march to its southward. snay obviously meant
it so, for it was the river he thought was the jub, but i did not
understand him.

[48] see dr beke's paper on 'the sources of the nile,' printed 1849.

[49] _kirangozi_--leader of a caravan.

[50] sheikh said has since declared, in "the most solemn manner, that
captain burton positively forbade his going." this happened when we
were at usenye, and immediately after i first asked the sheikh.

[51] captain burton started with two huge elephant-guns, one double
rifle, one pea-rifle, one air-gun, two revolving pistols, and a
cross-bow, all of which he used for display to amuse the arabs.

[52] sukuma means north, and the wasukuma are consequently northmen,
or northern wanyamuezi.

[53] _barsati_--a coloured cloth.

[54] one dhoti = 2 shukkas; 1 shukka = 4 cubits, or 2 yards, merikani
(american sheeting).

[55] _kiniki_--a thin indigo-dyed cloth.

[56] _boma_--a palisade. a village or collection of huts so fortified
is called so also.

[57] this, i maintain, was the discovery of the source of the nile.
had the ancient kings and sages known that a rainy zone existed on the
equator, they would not have puzzled their brains so long, and have
wondered where those waters came from which meander through upwards of
a thousand miles of scorching desert without a single tributary.

[58] this magnificent sheet of water i have ventured to name victoria,
after our gracious sovereign. its length was not clearly understood by
me, in consequence of the word sea having been applied both to the
lake and to the nile by my local informants; and there was no recent
map of the nile with the expedition by which i might have been guided.

[59] i now think the breadth is over one hundred miles.

[60] mahaya said he was of wahinda extraction, or from the princes of
the wahuma; but this i do not believe, for his features bore the
strongest possible testimony against him.

[61] the king of uganda has sent presents by boat to machunda, sultan
of ukerewe, coasting along the western shore of the lake. mtesa told
me this himself, and asked me if i knew machunda personally.

[62] the waganda also send boats for salt to the bahari (lake) ngo, at
the north-east corner of the lake.

[63] on my return to england i constructed a map representing this
view, and lectured on the same in presence of captain burton, who then
raised no objections to what i said.

[64] in england geographers doubted this; and after it was printed, dr
petermann had reason to change his opinion. however, knoblecher was
not far wrong, as i have since made the latitude of gondokoro 4o 54'
north.

[65] the rising of the katonga still puzzles me.

[66] kibuga means palace.

[67] there are three cataracts between the n'yanza and gondokoro: 1.
from ripon falls to urondogani; 2. from karuma falls to little luta
nzige; 3. from apuddo to near gondokoro.

[68] captain burton, by way of having a special lunae montes of his
own, calls these mountains a "mass of highlands, which, under the name
of karagwah, forms the western spinal prolongation of the lunar
mountains." see his 'lake regions,' vol. ii. p. 144.

[69] there are exceptions to the rule in the instance of the waganda,
who are of an earth-red colour; for these men never fight excepting in
overpowering numbers.

[70] the history of the wahuma has been given in 'the discovery of the
source of the nile.' the watuta also have been alluded to, for they
were fighting on my line of march. i heard then of the arrival of a
recent detachment from the west of the nyassa, and subsequently i
heard they had invaded usui.

[71] the wahuma are a link between the masai and the kafirs, so far as
i can judge of the common origin of this migratory pastoral race. the
ethnologist ought to look well into this matter, and treat it without
regard to change of language or names, as time will efface and create
both anew.

[72] since writing this, as i have had more insight into africa by
travelling from kaze to egypt down the whole length of the nile, i
would be sorry to leave this opinion standing without making a few
more remarks. of all places in africa, by far the most inviting to
missionary enterprise are the kingdoms of karague, uganda, and unyoro.
they are extremely fertile and healthy, and the temperature is
delightfully moderate. so abundant, indeed, are all provisions, and so
prolific the soil, that a missionary establishment, however large,
could support itself after the first year's crop. being ruled by kings
of the abyssinian type, there is no doubt but that they have a latent
christianity in them. these kings are powerful enough to keep up their
governments under numerous officers. they have expressed a wish to
have their children educated; and i am sure the missionary need only
go there to obtain all he desires on as secure a basis as he will find
anywhere else in those parts of africa which are not under the rule of
europeans. if this was effected by the aid of an egyptian force at
gondokoro, together with an arrangement for putting the white nile
trade on a legitimate footing between that station and unyoro, the
heathen would not only be blessed, but we should soon have a great and
valuable commerce. without protection, though, i would not advise any
one to go there.

now, for the use of commercial inquirers, i may also add, that it may
be seen in my 'journal of the discovery of the source of the nile,'
that the kings of these three countries were all, more or less,
adverse to my passing through their countries to the nile; but they
gave way, and permitted my doing so, on my promising to open a direct
trade with this country and theirs by the channel of that river. i
gave them the promise freely, for i saw by the nature of the land,
subjected as it is to frequently recurring showers of rain all the
year round, that it will be, in course of time, one of the greatest
nations on the earth. it is nearer to europe than india; it is far
more fertile, and it possesses none of those disagreeable elements of
discontent which have been such a sharp thorn in our sides in india--i
mean a history and a religion far anterior to our own, which makes
those we govern there shrink from us, caused by a natural antipathy of
being ruled by an inferior race, as we are by them considered to be.
these countries, on the contrary, have no literature, and therefore
have neither history nor religion to excite discontent should any
foreigners intrench on their lands. by this i do not wish it to be
supposed that i would willingly see any foreign european power upset
these wahuma governments; but, on the contrary, i would like to see
them maintained as long as possible, and i seriously trust some steps
may speedily be taken for that most desirable object. should it not be
so, then in a short time these kingdoms will fall into the hands of
those vile ruffian traders on the white nile, in the same way as kaze
has been occupied by the arabs of zanzibar. to give an instance of the
way it most likely will be effected, i will merely state that the king
of unyoro begged me repeatedly to kill some rebel brothers of his, who
were then occupying an island between his palace and the little luta
nzige. i would not do it, as i thought it would be a bad example to
set in the country; but some time afterwards i felt sorry for it, for
on arrival in madi, where i first met the nile traders, i found that
they were in league with these very rebels to dethrone the king. the
atrocities committed by these traders are beyond all civilised belief.
they are constantly fighting, robbing, and capturing slaves and
cattle. no honest man can either trade or travel in the country, for
the natives have been bullied to such an extent that they either fight
or run away, according to their strength and circumstance. that a
great quantity of ivory is drawn from those countries i must admit,
for these traders ramify in all directions, and, vying with one
another, see who can get most ivory at the least expense, no matter
what means they employ to obtain their ends.

at the same time, i have no hesitation in saying that ten times as
much merchandise might be got at less expense, if the trade were
protected by government means, and put on a legitimate footing. those
countries teem with cattle. the indigenous cotton is of very superior
quality. indigo, sugar-cane, coffee, tobacco, sesamum, and indeed all
things that will grow in a tropical climate, may be grown there within
3o of the equator, in luxurious profusion, and without any chance of
failure owing to those long periodical droughts which affect all lands
distant more than 3o from the equator.

when i was sailing down the nile, i could not help remarking to all
the pashas i visited how strange it appeared that men so civilised as
they were should be living in such a barren, hot, and glaring land as
egypt, when the negroes on the equator were absolutely living in the
richest and pleasantest garden in the world, so far as nature has made
the two countries.

now, though i have dwelt so markedly on the surprising fertility of
uganda and unyoro in particular, i do not wish it to be supposed that
i consider those countries alone to be exclusively rich, for i believe
there is a continuous zone of fertility stretching right across africa
from east to west, affected only by the nature of the soil. in
advancing this argument, i hold that the greatest discovery i have
made in africa consists in my positive knowledge regarding the rainy
system of africa; and to exemplify it irrespectively of my
meteorological observations, i will state emphatically that as surely
as i have determined the source of the nile to lie within 3o of the
equator, and that it cannot emanate from any point farther south,
because all the lands beyond that limit are subject to long periodical
droughts--so certain am i that the tanganyika is supplied from the
same source, or rainy zone, though draining in the opposite direction.
again, to its west also, from the same source of supply, the
head-waters of the zambezi take their origin. still farther west, the
fountains of the congo must have their birth. again, farther west
still, the chadda branch of the niger can alone be thus supplied, and
the same must be the case with the gaboon river.

to carry this argument still farther, i would direct attention to the
periodical conditions of the blue nile and niger rivers. both of these
rivers rise in high mountains on the coast-range, at about 10o north
latitude, but on opposite sides of the continent. they are considered
large rivers, but only in consequence of their great floodings, when
the sun, in his northern declination, brings the rains over the seats
of their birthplaces; for when the sun is in the south they shrink so
low that the waters of the blue river would never have power to reach
the sea were they not assisted by the perennial stream of the white
nile.

the most important exploring expedition that any one could undertake
now, would be to cross africa from east to west, keeping close to the
first degree of north latitude, to ascertain the geological formation
of that parallel. within the coast-ranges, in consequence of the great
elevation of the land, the temperature is always moderate, and it is
proved to be much more healthy than any of those parts of africa
subjected to periodical seasons. next to this scheme, i would
recommend this fertile zone to be attacked from gondokoro on the nile,
and from gaboon (the french port) on the equator. the gondokoro line,
being known to a considerable extent, is ready for working, and only
requires government protection to make it succeed; but the other line
from the gaboon should first be inspected by a scientific expedition.





