



e-text prepared by project gutenberg distributed proofreaders



the journal of a mission to the interior of africa,

in the year 1805

together with other documents, official and private,

journal.

chapter i.

departure from kayee--arrival at pisania--preparations there, and
departure into the interior--samee--payment to mumbo jumbo--reach
jindey; process of dying cottons at that place--departure from
jindey--cross the wallia creek--kootakunda--madina--tabajang--kingdom of
jamberoo--visit from the king's son--tatticonda--visit from the son of
the former king of woolli--reach madina, the capital of woolli--audience
of the king; his unfriendly conduct--presents made to him and his
courtiers--barraconda--bambakoo--kanipe; inhospitable conduct of its
inhabitants--kussai--nittatrees; restrictions relating to them--enter
the simbani woods--precautions thereon, and sacrifice and prayers for
success--banks of the gambia--crocodiles and hippopotami--reach
faraba--loss of one of the soldiers--rivers neaulico and
nerico--astronomical observations.

chapter ii.

arrival at jallacotta--maheena--tambico--bady; hostile conduct of the
faranba, or chief, and its consequences--reach jeningalla--
iron-furnaces--mansafard--attacked by wolves--enter the
tenda wilderness--ruins and plain of doofroo--attacked by a swarm of
bees--astronomical observations--arrival at sibikillin--shea
trees--badoo; presents made to the king--tambacunda--ba deema
river--tabba gee--mambari--julifunda; unfriendly conduct of its chief;
and presents sent to him and the king--visit from the latter--reach
eercella--baniserite--celebrate his majesty's birthday--mode of fluxing
iron--madina--falema river--satadoo--sickness and death of the
carpenter--arrival at shrondo; commencement of the rainy season; and
alarming sickness amongst the soldiers--gold mines; process for
procuring the gold--dindikoo; gold pits--cultivation--arrival at fankia.

chapter iii.

departure from fankia--tambaura mountains, and difficulties in ascending
the pass--toombin--great embarrassments on the road--serimanna--fajemmia
astronomical observations--increase of the sick--nealakatla--balee
river--boontoonkooran--doggikotta--falifing--losses on the road--gimbia;
inhospitable treatment--sullo--face of the country--secoba
konkromo--passage of the ba fing--mode of smelting and working
gold--fatal accident in crossing the ba fing--hippopotami--deaths and
losses on the route--increase of sickness--reach viandry--koeena--danger
from young lions--koombandi--great embarrassments on the
road--fonilla--ba woolima river; difficulties in crossing it--isaaco
seized by a crocodile--boolinkoonbo--distressing situation of the whole
of the party--reach serrababoo-saboseera.

chapter iv.

arrival at keminoom, or manniakorro, on the ba lee river.--visit to the
chief--depredations upon the coffle by the inhabitants--continued
attacks from banditti as far as the ba woolima river.--difficulties in
passing it--temporary bridge made by the natives.--astronomical
observations--arrival at mareena; inhospitable conduct of its
inhabitants--bangassi; interview with the king--continued sickness, and
deaths among the soldiers.--arrival at nummasoolo--obliged to leave five
of the sick behind--reach surtaboo--sobee--affray between isaaco and two
soldiers--balanding--balandoo--more of the soldiers fall
behind--koolihori--greatly annoyed by wolves.

chapter v.

departure from koolihori--ganifarra--scarcity of provisions--distressing
situation of the author from deaths and sickness of the party--escapes
from three lions--intricate route to koomikoomi--dombila--visit from
karfa taura--view of the niger--reduced state of the party--bambakoo--
losses from wolves--bosradoo; embark on the niger; incidents in the
voyage to marraboo--isaaco sent to sego with presents for mansong--
message from mansong--course to koolikorro--deena--yamina--samee--
return of isaaco; account of his interview with mansong--messengers
sent by mansong, and enquiries respecting the author's journey--quit
samee--excessive heat--reach sansanding--account of that city and its
trade--death of mr. anderson--preparations for continuing the voyage
eastward--information collected respecting various districts.

isaaco's journal




account

of the

life of mungo park.


mungo park was born on the 10th of september 1771, at fowlshiels, a farm
occupied by his father, under the duke of buccleugh, on the banks of the
yarrow not far from the town of selkirk. his father, who bore the same
name, was a respectable yeoman of ettrick forest. his mother, who is
still living, is the daughter of the late mr. john hislop, of tennis, a
few miles higher up on the same river. the subject of this memoir was
the seventh child, and third son of the family, which consisted of
thirteen children, eight of whom attained to years of maturity.

prior to the time of mungo park's birth, the father had for many years
practised farming with assiduity and success on the estate at
fowlshiels, where he died in 1792, after a long and exemplary life, at
the age of seventy-seven.

among other estimable qualities which distinguished the father's
character, was a constant and unremitting attention to the education of
his children; a species of merit, which is indeed of common occurrence
among the scottish farmers and peasantry, but which appears to have been
exemplary and remarkable in the present instance. his family being
numerous, he did not content himself with personally superintending
every part of their education; but, though far from being in affluent
circumstances, engaged a private teacher to reside in his house and
assist in their early instruction.

it is most satisfactory to add, that these paternal cares were followed
by the happiest results, and received their appropriate reward. mr. park
had the gratification of seeing the greater part of his children
respectably settled during his life, and of witnessing their success and
prosperity.

after having received the first rudiments of education in his father's
family, mungo park was in due time removed to the grammar school at
selkirk, where he remained a considerable number of years. he had shewn
a great love of reading from his childhood, and was indefatigable in his
application at school, where he was much distinguished and always at the
head of his class. even at that early age, he was remarked for being
silent, studious and thoughtful: but some sparks of latent ambition
occasionally broke forth: and indications might even then be discovered
of that ardent and adventurous turn of mind, which distinguished him in
after life, and which often lies concealed under a cold and reserved
exterior.

it was the original intention of park's father to educate him for the
scottish church, for which he appeared to be well fitted by his studious
habits and the serious turn of his mind; but, his son having made choice
of the medical profession, he was readily induced to acquiesce. in
consequence of this determination, mungo park was bound apprentice at
the age of fifteen to mr. thomas anderson, a respectable surgeon in
selkirk, with whom he resided three years; continuing, at the same time,
to pursue his classical studies and to attend occasionally at the
grammar school. in the year 1789, he quitted mr. anderson, and removed
to the university of edinburgh, where he pursued the course which is
common to medical students, and attended the usual lectures during three
successive sessions.

nothing particular is recorded of his academical life. he appears,
however, to have applied to the studies connected with the science of
medicine with his accustomed ardour and assiduity, and to have been
distinguished among his fellow-students. during his summer vacations he
paid great attention to botanical pursuits, for which he seems always to
have had a great predilection; and a tour which he made, about this time
to the highlands, in company with his brother-in-law, mr. james dickson,
a distinguished botanist, contributed greatly to his improvement in this
science.

after having completed his studies at edinburgh, park removed to london
in search of some medical employment. in this pursuit he was much
assisted by his relation mr. dickson, to whom he had before been
indebted in his botanical studies. by his means park was now introduced
to sir joseph banks; whose interest or recommendation shortly afterwards
procured for him the appointment of assistant surgeon to the worcester
east indiaman.

from this period park was honoured with the patronage, and indeed with
the constant friendship, of sir joseph banks, from which he derived many
important advantages, and which had a material influence on the
subsequent events of his life. for this highly valuable friendship he
was originally indebted to a connection which had subsisted for many
years between sir joseph and mr. dickson: and it may not therefore be
improper, to describe shortly the origin and nature of this connection;
which, besides its immediate influence on park's fortunes, was attended
with several characteristic circumstances highly honourable to the
parties concerned, and in themselves not uninteresting.

mr. dickson was born of humble parents, and came early in life, from
scotland, his native country, to london. for some time he worked as a
gardener in the grounds of a considerable nurseryman at hammersmith,
where he was occasionally seen by sir joseph banks, who took notice of
him as an intelligent young man. quitting this situation he lived for
some years as gardener in several considerable families: after which he
established himself in london as a seedsman; and has ever since followed
that business with unremitting diligence and success. having an ardent
passion for botany, which he had always cultivated according to the best
of his means and opportunities; he lost no time in presenting himself to
sir joseph banks, who received him with great kindness, encouraged him
in his pursuits, and gave him access to his valuable library. he thus
obtained the free use of one of the most complete collections on botany
and natural history, which has perhaps, ever yet been formed; and which,
through the liberality of its possessor, has contributed in a greater
degree to the accommodation of scientific men, and the general
advancement of science than many public establishments. such leisure
hours as mr. dickson could command from his business, he devoted to an
assiduous attendance in this library or to the perusal of scientific
books obtained from thence. in process of time he acquired great
knowledge and became eminent among the english botanists; and is now
known in europe among the proficients in that science as one of its most
successful cultivators, and the author of some distinguished works. at
an advanced period of life he is still active in business, and continues
to pursue his botanical studies with unabated ardour and assiduity.
[footnote: mr. dickson is a fellow of the linnaean society, of which he
was one of the original founders: and also fellow and vice president of
the horticultural society. several communications from him, appear in
different volumes of the linnaean transactions; but he is principally
known among botanists by a work entitled, "fasciculi quatuor plantarum,
cryptogamicarum britanniae." _lond._ 1785-93; in which he has described
upwards of four hundred plants not before noticed. he has the merit of
having directed the attention of the botanists of this country to one of
the most abstruse and difficult parts of that science; to the
advancement of which he has himself, very greatly contributed.]

such an instance of successful industry united with a taste for
intellectual pursuits, deserves to be recorded; not only on account of
its relation to the subject of this narrative, but because, it
illustrates in a very striking and pleasing manner, the advantages of
education in the lower classes of life. the attention of the scottish
farmers and peasantry to the early instruction of their children has
been already remarked, and is strongly exemplified in the history of mr.
park's family. the diffusion of knowledge among the natives of that part
of the kingdom, and their general intelligence, must be admitted by
every unprejudiced observer; nor is there any country in which the
effects of education are so conspicuous in promoting industry and good
conduct, and in producing useful and respectable men of the inferior and
middle classes, admirably fitted for all the important offices of common
life. [footnote: see appendix, no. i.]

       *        *        *        *        *

in consequence of the appointment which mungo park had obtained as
surgeon in the east india company's service, by the interest of sir
joseph banks, he sailed for the east indies in the worcester in the
month of february, 1792; and having made a voyage to bencoolen, in the
island of sumatra, returned to england in the following year. nothing
material occurred during this voyage: but he availed himself of all the
opportunities which it afforded to obtain information in his favourite
scientific pursuits, and appears to have made many observations, and
collected many specimens, in botany and natural history. several of
these were the subjects of a communication made by him to the linnaean
society, which was afterwards published in their printed transactions.
[footnote: in the third volume of the linnaean transactions, p. 83, is a
paper by park, read nov. 4,1794, containing descriptions of eight new
fishes from sumatra; which he represents to be the fruit of his leisure
hours during his stay on that coast.]

it does not sufficiently appear, whether mr. park, after his return from
the east indies, came to any final resolution with regard to his
continuing as a surgeon in the company's service. but whatever might be
his intention in this respect, new prospects now opened upon him, and a
scene of action far more congenial to his taste and feelings, was
presented to his ambition.

some years prior to this period, a few distinguished individuals,
induced by a very liberal spirit of curiosity, had formed themselves
into an association for promoting discoveries in the interior of africa,
and were now prosecuting their researches with great activity and
success. in the course of a few years they had investigated, and placed
in a clearer point of view than had hitherto been done by geographers,
some of the leading facts relative to the northern part of that
continent; the characteristic differences of the principal tribes, their
commercial relations, the routes of the great caravans, the general
diffusion of the mahomedan religion, and the consequent prevalence of
the arabic language throughout a considerable part of that vast
continent. [footnote: see vol. i. of the proceedings of african
association. london, 1810.] with the assistance of their distinguished
associate, major rennell, they were now proceeding to trace the
principal geographical outlines of northern africa; and were
endeavouring to ascertain the course of the great inland river joliba or
niger, and to obtain some authentic information concerning tombuctoo, a
principal city of the interior and one of the great marts of african
commerce.

in the course of these enquiries, the association, since their first
establishment in 1788, had employed several persons, well qualified for
such undertakings, upon missions into various parts of the african
continent. several of these were known to have perished, either as
victims of the climate, or in contests with the natives; [footnote: the
persons who had been sent out prior to this period, were mr. ledyard,
mr. lucas, major houghton, and mr. horneman: subsequently to which,
several others have been employed; viz. mr. nichols, mr. bourcard, &c.]
and intelligence had lately been received of the death of major
houghton, who had been sent out to explore the course of the niger, and
to penetrate, if possible, to tombuctoo and houssa. the association
appear to have found considerable difficulty in supplying major
houghton's place; and had made known their readiness to give a liberal
compensation to any person, competently qualified, who might be willing
to proceed on this important and arduous mission.

the attention of park was naturally drawn to this subject, in
consequence of his connection with sir joseph banks, who had received
him with great kindness and cordiality on his return from the east
indies, and with whom he was now in habits of frequent intercourse. sir
joseph banks was one of the most active and leading members of the
african association, and with his accustomed zeal for the promotion of
scientific discovery, was earnest in his endeavours to find out a proper
person to undertake the mission in search of the niger. there was
nothing in park's previous studies which had particularly led him
towards geographical pursuits; but he had a general passion for
travelling; he was in the full vigour of life; his constitution had been
in some degree inured to hot climates; he saw the opportunities which a
new country would afford of indulging his taste for natural history: nor
was he insensible to the distinction which was likely to result from any
great discoveries in african geography. these considerations determined
him. having fully informed himself as to what was expected by the
association, he eagerly offered himself for the service; and after some
previous enquiry into his qualifications, the offer was readily
accepted.

between the time of park's return from india in 1793, and his departure
to africa, an interval elapsed of about two years. during the whole of
this period (with the exception of a short visit to scotland in 1794),
he appears to have resided in london or its neighbourhood; being engaged
partly in his favourite studies, or in literary or scientific society;
but principally in acquiring the knowledge and making the preparations,
which were requisite for his great undertaking.

having received his final instructions from the african association, he
set sail from portsmouth on the 22d of may, 1795, on board the
endeavour, an african trader, bound for the gambia, where he arrived on
the 21st of the following month. it is not the intention of this
narrative to follow him through the details of this journey, a full
account of which was afterwards published by park, and is familiar to
every reader. but it may be useful to mention the material dates and
some of the principal transactions.

having landed on the 21st of june at jillifree, a small town near the
mouth of the river gambia; he proceeded shortly afterwards to pisania, a
british factory about 200 miles up the same river, where he arrived on
the 5th of july, and was most hospitably received by dr. laidley, a
gentleman who had resided many years at that settlement. he remained at
dr. laidley's house for several months, in order to learn the mandingo
language, which is in general use throughout that part of africa, and
also to collect information concerning the countries he intended to
visit. during two of these months he was confined by a severe fever,
caught by imprudently exposing himself during the rainy season.

he left pisania on the 2d of december, 1795, directing his course
easterly, with a view of proceeding to the river joliba, or niger. but
in consequence of a war between two sovereigns in the interior, he was
obliged, after he had made some progress, to take a northerly direction
towards the territory of the moors. he arrived at jarra, the frontier
town of that country, on the 18th of february, 1796. pursuing his
journey from thence, he was taken and detained as a prisoner, by ali,
the chieftain or king of that territory, on the 7th of march; and after
a long captivity and a series of unexampled hardships, escaped at last
with great difficulty early in the month of july.

the period was now approaching when he was to receive some compensation
for so many sufferings. after wandering in great misery for about three
weeks through the african wilderness, he arrived at sego, the capital of
bambarra, a city which is said to contain thirty thousand inhabitants.
he was gratified at the same time by the first sight of the niger, the
great object of his journey; and ascertained the extraordinary fact,
that its course is from west to east.

after a short stay at sego (where he did not find it safe to remain),
park proceeded down the river to silla, a large town distant about
seventy or eighty miles, on the banks of the niger. he was now reduced
to the greatest distress, and being convinced by painful experience,
that the obstacles to his further progress were insurmountable, he
reluctantly abandoned his design of proceeding eastwards; and came to
the resolution of going back to sego, and endeavouring to effect his
return to the gambia by a different route from that by which he had
advanced into africa.

on the 3d of august, 1796, he left silla, and pursuing the course of the
niger, arrived at bammakoo, the frontier of bambarra, about the 23d of
the same month. here he quitted the niger, which ceases to be navigable
at this place; and travelling for several weeks through a mountainous
and difficult country, reached kamalia, in the territory of manding, on
the 16th of september. he performed the latter part of this journey on
foot, having been obliged to leave his horse, now worn out with fatigue
and unable to proceed farther.

having encountered all the horrors of the rainy season, and being worn
down by fatigue, his health had, at different times, been seriously
affected. but, soon after his arrival at kamalia, he fell into a severe
and dangerous fit of sickness, by which he was closely confined for
upwards of a month. his life was preserved by the hospitality and
benevolence of karfa taura, a negro, who received him into his house,
and whose family attended him with the kindest solicitude. the same
excellent person, at the time of park's last mission into africa,
hearing that a white man was travelling through the country, whom he
imagined to be park, took a journey of six days to meet him; and joining
the caravan at bambakoo, was highly gratified by the sight of his
friend. [footnote: see journal, p. 137.]

there being still a space of five hundred miles to be traversed (the
greater part of it through a desert) before park could reach any
friendly country on the gambia, he had no other resource but to wait
with patience for the first caravan of slaves that might travel the same
track. no such opportunity occurred till the latter end of april, 1797;
when a coffle, or caravan, set out from kamalia under the direction of
karfa taura, in whose house he had continued during his long residence
of more than seven months at that place.

the coffle began its progress westwards on the 17th of april, and on the
4th of june reached the banks of the gambia, after a journey of great
labour and difficulty, which afforded park the most painful
opportunities of witnessing the miseries endured by a caravan of slaves
in their transportation from the interior to the coast. on the 10th of
the same month park arrived at pisania, from whence he had set out
eighteen months before; and was received by dr. laidley (to use his own
expression) as one risen from the grave. on the 15th of june he embarked
in a slave ship bound to america, which was driven by stress of weather
to the west indies; and got with great difficulty, and under
circumstances of considerable danger, into the island of antigua. he
sailed from thence on the 24th of november, and after a short, but
tempestuous passage, arrived at falmouth on the 22d of the following
month, having been absent from england two years and seven months.

immediately on his landing he hastened to london, anxious in the
greatest degree about his family and friends, of whom he had heard
nothing for two years. he arrived in london before day-light on the
morning of christmas day, 1797; and it being too early an hour to go to
his brother-in-law, mr. dickson, he wandered for some time about the
streets in that quarter of the town where his house was. finding one of
the entrances into the gardens of the british museum accidentally open,
he went in and walked about there for some time. it happened that mr.
dickson, who had the care of those gardens, went there early that
morning upon some trifling business. what must have been his emotions on
beholding at that extraordinary time and place, the vision, as it must
at first have appeared, of his long-lost friend, the object of so many
anxious reflexions, and whom he had long numbered with the dead!

       *        *        *        *        *

park's arrival was hailed with a sort of triumph by his friends of the
african association, and in some degree, by the public at large. the
nature and objects of his mission, his long absence, and his unexpected
return, excited a very general interest; which was afterwards kept up by
the reports which prevailed respecting the discoveries he had made. the
association, with that liberality which characterised every part of
their proceedings, gave him full permission to publish his travels for
his own benefit; and it was speedily announced, that a complete
narrative of the journey would be prepared by park himself, and given to
the public. but in the mean time, in order to gratify, in a certain
degree, the curiosity which prevailed, an abstract, of the travels,
prepared from park's own minutes, was drawn up by mr. bryan edwards,
secretary of the african association, and was printed and distributed
for the private use of the subscribers. [footnote: proceedings of
african association. vol. i. p. 327.] this abstract, which was written
with perspicuity and elegance, formed the principal ground-work of the
book of travels which was subsequently published.

to the abstract or narrative, thus circulated, was annexed an important
memoir by major rennell, consisting of geographical illustrations of
park's journey, which afterwards, by that gentleman's permission, formed
a valuable appendage to the quarto edition of the travels.

after his return from africa, park remained for a considerable time
stationary in london, and was diligently employed in arranging the
materials for his intended publication. he had frequent occasion, also,
to communicate on the subject of his discoveries with the members of the
african association, especially with major rennell and mr. edwards,
whilst they were engaged in preparing the two memoirs before alluded to.
with mr. edwards, in particular, he seems to have lived on terms of
great friendship, and to have occasionally paid him visits at his
country residence near southampton.

it was nearly about this time (the spring of the year 1798) that
government, having it in contemplation to procure a complete survey of
new holland, made some application to park, with a view of employing him
upon that service. the particulars of this transaction are not known to
park's family, nor is it now material to enquire; since the proposal,
whatever it might be, was declined. it was afterwards repeated, and
again declined, during the following year.

in june, 1798, he visited his mother, who still resided at fowlshiels,
and his other relations in scotland, and remained with them the whole of
the summer and autumn. during all this time he was assiduously employed
in compiling and arranging the account of his travels. his materials for
this work are stated to have consisted of short notes or memoranda,
written on separate pieces of paper, forming an imperfect journal of his
proceedings. where these were wanting, he supplied the deficiency from
his memory. [footnote: enquiry has been made for the notes here alluded
to, with a view to the elucidation of several points connected with this
narrative, but without success; it being stated by mr. dickson, that a
number of loose papers were left at his house by park, and remained
there for some time; but being considered of no use, were mislaid or
destroyed; and that none of them are now to be found.]

his family represent him dating this period as leading the life of a
severe student, employed on his papers during the whole of the mornings,
and allowing himself little or no recreation, except a solitary evening
walk on the banks of the yarrow. occasionally, however, he would indulge
himself in longer excursions among the wild and romantic scenery of that
neighbourhood, to which he was fondly and almost enthusiastically
attached. [footnote: the situation of fowlshiels on the banks of the
yarrow is said to be picturesque and striking. it is in the immediate
vicinity of bow-hill, a beautiful summer-residence of the duke of
buccleugh; and at no great distance from the ruins of newark castle, and
other scenes celebrated in the _lay of the last minstrel_]

he quitted fowlshiels, with great regret towards the latter end of 1798,
when it was necessary for him to return to london, to prepare for his
intended publication. he carried back with him a great mass of papers,
the produce of his summer's labour; and after his return to london,
bestowed considerable pains in the correction and retrenchment of his
manuscript before it was sent to the press. it was finally published in
the spring of the year 1799.

the applause with which this work was received, and the permanent
reputation which it has obtained, are well known. two impressions were
rapidly sold off; several other editions have since been called for; and
it continues even at the present time to be a popular and standard book.
this distinguished success has been owing, not only to the interesting
nature of its subject, but in a certain degree also to the merits of the
work as a composition; to the clearness of the descriptions, the natural
and easy flow of the narration, and the general elegance of the style.

but the essential merit of this book, and that which has conferred a
lasting distinction on the name of its author, consists in the authentic
and important information which it contains. considered in this point of
view, it must unquestionably be regarded as the greatest accession to
the general stock of geographical knowledge, which was ever yet made by
any single traveller. the claim of park to this distinction will be
apparent from a short view of his principal discoveries.

among the great variety of facts concerning the interior of africa not
before known, or at least not ascertained, which the labours of park
have placed beyond all doubt, the most interesting unquestionably are,
those which relate to the existence of the great inland river, the
niger, as a distinct and separate stream, and its course from west to
east; affording a remarkable confirmation of what had been stated
concerning this river by herodotus and the ancient writers; but which
was afterwards controverted by the geographers of the middle ages, who
asserted (what, independently of direct evidence, seemed more probable)
that the course of the river was from east to west. this latter opinion
had accordingly been followed by the greater part of the moderns; with
the exception indeed of some of the most distinguished geographers of
later times, particularly, d'anville and major rennell, who had called
in question the doctrine then prevalent, and given strong reasons for
adhering to the ancient opinion. this however at the time of park's
journey, could be considered in no other light than as a reasonable
conjecture, till the fact was ascertained by the unexceptionable
testimony of an eye-witness. [footnote: see appendix, no. ii.]

another important circumstance respecting the niger, previously unknown,
but which was fully established by park, is the vast magnitude of that
stream; an extraordinary fact, considering its situation and inland
course, and which has led, as will hereafter be seen, to several
interesting conjectures respecting the course and the termination of
that river.

in addition to these discoveries relative to the _physical_ state of
africa, others were made by park scarcely less important; in what may be
termed its moral geography; namely, the kind and amiable dispositions of
the negro inhabitants of the interior, as contrasted with the
intolerance and brutal ferocity of the moors; the existence of great and
populous cities in the heart of africa; and the higher state of
improvement and superior civilization of the inhabitants of the
interior, on a comparison with the inhabitants of the countries
adjoining to the coast.

to this it may be added, that the work in question contains many
interesting details not before known, concerning the face of the
country, its soil and productions, as well as the condition of the
inhabitants; their principal occupations, and their manners and habits
of life; and the anecdotes which are interspersed, illustrative of the
character and disposition of the negro inhabitants at a distance from
the coast, and beyond the influence of the slave trade, are in the
highest degree interesting and affecting. [footnote: see especially the
following passages in park's travels, p. 82, 197, 336.]

the difficulties and dangers endured by the author in traversing this
unknown continent; and the rare union of prudence, temper and
perseverance, with the greatest ardour and enterprise, which
distinguished his conduct in the most trying situations, give an
additional value to park's narrative. in this important, but difficult,
part of his work be appears to have been peculiarly successful. his
natural and unaffected manner of describing exertions and sufferings
which almost surpass the fictions of romance, carries a feeling and
conviction of truth to the mind of every reader, and excites deeper and
more powerful emotions than have often been produced, even by works of
imagination.

it is painful, after bestowing this well-merited praise, to be under the
necessity of adverting to two circumstances unfavourable to park's
memory, connected with the history of this publication. these are, 1st.
an opinion which has prevailed, that park was a supporter of the cause
of slavery, and an enemy to the abolition of the african slave trade;
and 2dly. a report, equally current, that the travels, of which he was
the professed author, were composed not by park himself, but in a very
considerable degree, by mr. bryan edwards.--topics, thus personal and
invidious, the writer of this memoir would naturally wish to decline;
but they are too intimately connected with the principal occurrences of
park's life to admit of being passed over without particular enquiry and
examination. for this purpose, it will be necessary to trace, more
distinctly than has hitherto been done, the connection between park and
mr. bryan edwards; which was a principal cause of the reports above
alluded to.

mr. edwards was an intelligent and respectable man, of no inconsiderable
literary attainments, and known as the author of the _history of the
british colonies in the west indies_. being possessed of property in
jamaica, he resided there many years as a planter; during which time he
was an eloquent and leading member of the house of assembly, or
provincial legislature of that island. some time about the year 1794,
when the question of the slave trade had for several years engaged the
attention of the british parliament and public, he quitted the west
indies and came to england, where he fixed his residence for the
remainder of his life. he shortly afterwards obtained a seat in the
house of commons, where he established a character as a man of business,
and came forward on every occasion as the advocate of the planters, and
the supporter of what are called the west india interests. in all
debates upon questions connected with the slave trade he took an active
part; and during the whole of his parliamentary career was a leading and
systematic opponent of the abolition.

as secretary of the african association, mr. edwards had constant
intercourse and communication with park from the time when the latter
first arrived from africa; and must immediately have seen the advantage
to be gained for the slave trade by a skilful use of the influence which
this situation gave him. his first object must naturally have been, to
gain the services of park in the direct support of the slave trade; or,
if this should be found impracticable, he might at least hope to secure
his neutrality, and prevent him from joining the ranks of his opponents.
it is not meant to be insinuated that mr. edwards exerted any influence
which was manifestly undue and improper, or that he was disposed to go
greater lengths than any other man of a warm and sanguine temper, in
support of a cause in which he was deeply embarked, and of the
importance of which he felt the strongest conviction. the sentiments and
conduct here imputed to him, arose naturally out of the situation in
which he was placed; and he probably did no more than would have been
done under similar circumstances, by any partizan of the abolition,
equally able and zealous.

a previous knowledge of these particulars is necessary for enabling the
reader to form a judgment upon the two points connected with the
publication of park's travels, which were before alluded to. with
respect to the first of these questions, namely, that relative to park's
sentiments on the subject of the abolition, the writer of this
narrative, in consequence of information he has obtained from some of
park's nearest relations, is enabled to state with great confidence,
that park uniformly expressed a great abhorrence of slavery and the
slave trade, whenever these subjects occurred in conversation. but the
same persons farther represent, that he considered the abolition of the
slave trade as a measure of _state policy_; for which reason he thought
it would be improper for him, in any work he might give to the public,
to interpose his private opinion relative to a question of such
importance, and which was then under the consideration of the
legislature.

whatever may be thought of the correctness of this opinion, it is
necessary to observe that the rule which he thus prescribed for his own
conduct, was not strictly adhered to; or rather, that the system of
neutrality which he professed, had, in a certain degree, the effect of a
declaration of opinion. from the time of the publication of park's
travels, his name was constantly mentioned in the list of persons
conversant with africa, who were not friendly to the abolition; and his
authority was always appealed to with some triumph by the advocates of
the slave trade: and this, apparently, with good reason. for, although
the author avowedly abstained from giving an explicit opinion as to the
effects of that traffic, yet the general tone of his work appeared to
leave no doubt with regard to his real sentiments; and indeed the
_silence_ of so intelligent a traveller relative to a subject which must
necessarily have engaged so much of his attention, was in itself a
sufficient proof, of a bias existing in the mind of the writer,
unfavourable to the abolition. for to what other cause could it be
attributed, that the slave trade was never once mentioned in park's book
as having the smallest share in promoting the barbarism and internal
disorders of the african continent? or, that in his pathetic description
of the miseries endured by the caravan of slaves which the author
accompanied from kamalia to the gambia (a journey of five hundred
miles), not the slightest allusion was made to the obvious and immediate
cause of these sufferings, the demand for slaves on the coast?--it must
further be recollected, that the slave trade, at the time when park
wrote, had engaged universal attention, and was become the subject of
much controversy and public discussion; yet this topic, of so much
interest and importance, occurs only once in the course of these
travels; and is then hastily dismissed with a slight and unmeaning
observation.

[footnote: the passage here particularly alluded to, is so
extraordinary, and affords such an illustration of the influence under
which this work was composed, that it deserves to be transcribed. after
a description of the state of slavery in africa, which the author
represents as a sort of necessary evil, deeply rooted in the habits and
manners of that country (but without in the least alluding to the great
aggravation of the evil arising from the european slave trade), the
author concludes his remarks as follows: "such are the general outlines
of that system of slavery which prevails in africa; and it is evident,
from its nature and extent, that it is a system of no modern date. it
probably had its origin in the remote ages of antiquity, before the
mahomedans explored a passage across the desert. how far it is
maintained and supported by the slave traffic which, for two hundred
years, the nations of europe have carried on with the natives of the
coast, it is neither within my province, nor in my power, to explain. if
my sentiments should be required concerning the effect which a
discontinuance of that commerce would produce on the manners of the
natives, i should have no hesitation in observing, that in the present
unenlightened state of their minds, my opinion is, the effect would
neither be so extensive nor beneficial as many wise and worthy persons
fondly expect." (park's travels, p. 297.)

on reading this passage, it is impossible not to be struck both with the
opinion itself and the manner in which it is expressed. the proposition,
literally taken, is a mere _truism_, undeniably just, but of no
practical value or importance. for, who doubts that the probable good
effects of the abolition may have been overrated by men of warm and
sanguine benevolence? or, who would assert, that such exaggerations
ought to have any weight in argument, except as inducements to greater
caution and deliberation?--but, the evident intention of the passage is,
to convey a meaning beyond what "meets the ear"; to produce an
_impression_ on the reader, independent of any proofs or principles by
which his opinion ought to be governed; and to insinuate, what it is not
thought proper to assert, that the zeal manifested in favour of the
abolition originated solely in ignorance and enthusiasm.]

it is a remarkable circumstance, that while the supposed _opinions_ of
park have always been appealed to by the advocates of the slave trade,
his _facts_ have as constantly been relied on by their opponents; and
that in the various discussions which have taken place upon that subject
since this work has appeared, the principal illustrations of the
arguments in favour of the abolition, have always been derived from the
statements contained in park's travels. this circumstance deserves
particular attention, considering the evident bias under which the work
was composed; and affords a strong presumption of the truth and fidelity
of the narrative. [footnote: for an enumeration of the various facts
contained in park's travels, which are relied on as favourable to the
cause of the abolition, accompanied by the proper references, see _a
concise statement of the question regarding the abolition of the slave
trade._ 3d ed. 1804, p. 99-106. a work, containing the most complete
summary of the arguments upon this great subject, which has yet
appeared.]

the fair result of the foregoing enquiry, relative to park's opinions
with regard to the abolition, appears to be shortly this; that he was at
no time the friend or deliberate advocate of the slave trade; but that,
his respect and deference for mr. edwards led him, in a certain degree,
to sacrifice his own opinions and feelings upon that subject; and that
he became, perhaps almost unconsciously, the supporter of a cause of
which he disapproved. that he should have been under any temptation to
suppress or soften any important opinion, or to deviate in any respect
from that ingenuousness and good faith which naturally belonged to his
character, is a circumstance which cannot be sufficiently lamented. but
if there are any who feel disposed to pass a very severe censure upon
park's conduct, let his situation at the time when he was preparing his
travels for the press, be fairly considered. he was then a young man,
inexperienced in literary composition, and in a great measure dependent,
as to the prospects of his future life, upon the success of his intended
publication. his friend and adviser, mr. edwards, was a man of letters
and of the world, who held a distinguished place in society, and was,
besides, a leading member of the african association, to which park owed
every thing, and with which his fate and fortunes were still intimately
connected. it is difficult to estimate the degree of authority which a
person possessing these advantages, and of a strong and decisive
character, must necessarily have had over the mind of a young man in the
situation which has now been described. suggestions coming from such a
quarter, must have been almost equivalent to commands; and instead of
animadverting very severely on the extent of park's compliances, we
ought perhaps rather to be surprised, that more was not yielded to an
influence which must have been nearly unlimited.

before we dismiss this subject, it may be proper to add, that some time
subsequent to the publication of his travels, park appeared to be fully
sensible that the manner in which he had treated the question of the
slave trade, was liable to some objections; and evidence now exists,
that upon some occasions when his authority had been appealed to as
being favourable to that system, he expressed his regret that an
improper stress had been laid upon certain passages in his travels, and
that a meaning had been attributed to them, which it was not intended
that they should bear.

it remains to be enquired, whether there is any just foundation for the
opinion which has prevailed with regard to the degree of assistance
given by mr. edwards in the actual composition of park's work; as to
which very few remarks will be necessary. the intimate connection of mr.
edwards with park, the interest which he took in the success of his
publication, and the influence which he appears to have exerted with
respect to its contents, make it quite evident, that he must have seen,
and been consulted upon, every part of the work; and there can be no
question but that he, at least, revised and corrected the whole
manuscript before it was sent to the press. it was avowed by park
himself, that as occasion offered, he had incorporated into different
parts of his work, by permission of mr. edwards, the _whole_ of the
narrative prepared by the latter for the use of the association.
[footnote: park's travels. preface, p. ix.] a person accustomed to
literary composition, and confident of his own powers, would hardly have
chosen to avail himself of this assistance; which would be attended only
with a slight saving of labour, and might probably have the unpleasant
effect of a mixture of different styles. no such disadvantage, it maybe
observed, has in fact resulted from the course pursued in the present
instance. no inequalities are apparent in park's narrative; nor are the
passages which have been inserted from mr. edwards's memoir, to be
distinguished from the rest of the work. the style is throughout
uniform, and bears all the marks of a practised pen. generally speaking
indeed, it is more simple, and consequently more pleasing, than that of
mr. edwards's avowed compositions. but, notwithstanding its general
merits, it is altogether perhaps too much laboured; and in particular
passages, betrays too much of the art of a professed writer. [footnote:
it would be easy, but invidious, to produce passages from park's work
more or less marked with some of the characteristics of mr. edwards's
style, and, in particular, with that tendency to ambitious ornament,
which is so conspicuous in many parts of the _history of the west
indies_.--the following extract from park's chapter on the state of
slavery in africa, may be sufficient. "in a country divided into a
thousand petty states, mostly independent, and jealous of each other,
where every freeman is accustomed to arms, and fond of military
achievements; where the youth who has practised the bow and spear from
his infancy, longs for nothing so much as an opportunity to display his
valour, it is natural to imagine, that wars frequently originate from
very frivolous provocation. when one nation is more powerful than
another, a pretext is seldom wanting for commencing hostilities. thus,
the war between kajaaga and kasson was occasioned by the detention of a
fugitive slave:--that between bambarra and kaarta by the loss of a few
cattle. other cases of the same nature perpetually occur, _in which the
folly or mad ambition of their princes and the zeal of their religious
enthusiasts give full employment for the scythe of desolation_." (park's
travels, p. 290.)--on reading this passage, and the chapter from which
it is taken, it may deserve to be remarked, (with reference to former
observations as to the bias under which park's work was written) that in
enumerating the causes of the wars which desolate africa, the slave
trade is never once mentioned.]

from these observations, combined with the several facts before stated,
it seems clearly to follow, that mr. edwards had a large share in park's
work; and, without attempting to ascertain in what degree he assisted in
the composition, it may safely be affirmed that the assistance afforded
was considerable and important. [footnote: see appendix, no. iii.]

it would be a subject of sincere regret to the author of this
biographical sketch, if he thought that this opinion (which he does not
feel himself at liberty to suppress,) was likely to detract in any
material degree from park's well-earned reputation. but he is satisfied
that there is no just cause for such an apprehension. it is
unquestionably most desirable, that the adventures and discoveries of
distinguished travellers should be given to the public, as far as
circumstances will permit, in the language of the parties themselves;
and there is no judicious reader, who would not decidedly prefer the
simple, but authentic, narrative of an eye-witness, to any account of
the same transactions from a different hand, however superior in
literary merit. but the custom of employing professional writers upon
similar occasions, has become so frequent, that the resorting to such
assistance in any particular instance can no longer be considered as a
just subject of animadversion; and, in forming our judgment upon books
of voyages and travels (in which this practice is most common), we must
in general rest satisfied, if we can obtain a reasonable assurance, that
the compiler has made a correct and proper use of his materials. that
this duty has been faithfully and conscientiously performed in the case
of park's travels, there is not the slightest reason to doubt. the
authenticity of the work is apparent, not only, as has been already
stated, from the internal evidence of many parts of the narrative, but
from the known character of park, as well as of mr. edwards, his
associate; who (there is every reason to believe) was a man of honour
and veracity, and incapable of concealing or wilfully misrepresenting
any important fact or circumstance.

it must further be recollected, that the essential merit of works of
this description, consists in the authenticity and importance of the
information they contain; compared with which, the beauties of style and
composition are only of secondary and very inferior importance. the
literary character of park forms a small part of his general reputation.
this must always rest upon grounds altogether independent of the merits
of his work as a composition; and whatever may be hereafter thought of
his claims to distinction as a writer, his fame as a geographical
discoverer, an explorer of unknown countries, and a man of courage and
capacity in the most arduous and trying situations, must ever remain
undiminished.

       *       *       *       *       *

after the publication of his travels, park began to think of settling
himself in life. during his last residence in scotland in the summer and
autumn of 1798, he had formed a matrimonial engagement with the eldest
daughter of mr. anderson of selkirk, with whom he had served his
apprenticeship. he returned therefore to scotland in the summer of 1799,
and was married on the 2d of august in that year. this union, which
connected him still more closely with a family with which he had long
lived in friendship, contributed in a high degree to his future comfort
and happiness.

for more than two years after his marriage, he resided with his mother
and one of his brothers, who lived together and carried on the farm at
fowlshiels. the reason of his continuing there so long a time does not
very distinctly appear, nor is any thing particular related as to the
manner in which he employed himself during this period. the profits of
his publication, and the liberal compensation which he had received from
the african association for the services rendered to them, had placed
him, for the present, in easy circumstances: and he remained for a long
time altogether doubtful and unsettled as to his future plan of life.
during part of the year 1799 he appears to have been engaged in a
negotiation with government (which finally proved unsuccessful) relative
to some public appointment in the colony of new south wales. at another
time he had partly determined to look out for a farm; and at last came,
somewhat reluctantly, to the determination of practising his profession,
to which he was perhaps at no time much attached, and which was now
become more irksome from disuse.

the uncertainty in the state of his affairs during this period was much
encreased by the hope, which he constantly entertained, of being sent
out on another expedition, either by the african association or by
government. this clearly appears from a letter which he wrote to sir
joseph banks, dated 31st of july, 1800; in which, he alludes to the late
capture of goree, which he considers as introductory to opening a
communication with the interior of africa; and after entering into some
details relative to that subject, he proceeds as follows: "if such are
the views of government, i hope that my exertions in some station or
other, may be of use to my country. i have not as yet found any
situation in which i could practise to advantage as a surgeon; and
unless some of my friends interest themselves in my behalf, i must wait
patiently, until the cloud which hangs over my future prospects is
dispelled."

an opportunity for medical practice, which was thought sufficiently
promising, having offered itself at peebles, he went to reside at that
town in the month of october, 1801, and betook himself in good earnest
to the exercise of his profession. within no great length of time he
acquired a good share of the business of the place and its
neighbourhood: but this being very limited, his profits were at no time
considerable. he was however very fully employed; for he was greatly
distinguished by the kindness which he shewed towards the poor, and by
that disinterested attention to the lower classes, which is one of the
great virtues of the medical profession.

under these circumstances, it cannot be thought surprising that he was
dissatisfied with his situation, and looked anxiously forward to some
other establishment. his former habits of life had indeed in a great
measure disqualified him for his present humble occupations. the
situation of a country practitioner in scotland, attended with great
anxiety and bodily fatigue, and leading to no distinction or much
personal advantage, was little calculated to gratify a man, whose mind
was full of ambitious views, and of adventurous and romantic
undertakings. his journies to visit distant patients--his long and
solitary rides over "cold and lonely heaths" and "gloomy hills assailed
by the wintry tempest," seem to have produced in him feelings of disgust
and impatience, which he had perhaps rarely experienced in the deserts
of africa. his strong sense of the irksomeness of this way of life broke
out from him upon many occasions; especially, when previously to his
undertaking his second african mission, one of his nearest relations
expostulated with him on the imprudence of again exposing himself to
dangers which he had so very narrowly escaped, and perhaps even to new
and still greater ones; he calmly replied, that a few inglorious winters
of country practice at peebles was a risk as great, and would tend as
effectually to shorten life, as the journey which he was about to
undertake.

it might have been expected, that a person who had been so much
accustomed to literary and scientific society, and who had lately been
in some degree admitted into the fashionable circles of the metropolis,
in which he had become an object of much interest and attention, would
have felt great repugnance to the solitude and obscurity of a small
market town. but this does not appear to have been the case. general
society, for which indeed he was not particularly suited, was not much
to his taste; and during every period of his life, he always looked
forward to a state of complete retirement and seclusion in the country,
as the object and end of all his labours. he had great enjoyment however
in his own domestic circle, and in the society of select friends; and
his residence at peebles was, in this respect, highly fortunate for him,
since it was the occasion of his becoming acquainted with two
distinguished residents in that neighbourhood; colonel john murray of
kringaltie, a very respectable old officer, then retired from the
service, and dr. adam ferguson; with both of whom he became intimate,
and passed much of his time. the latter of these, then residing at
hallyards in tweedsdale, is the well-known author of the _essay on civil
society_, and _history of the roman republic_, and was formerly
professor of moral philosophy at edinburgh; where, during many years, he
was one of that distinguished literary circle, of which hume, smith,
black, and robertson, were the principal ornaments. at the venerable age
of ninety-one, he is still living, the last survivor of that illustrious
society.

the friendship of a man thus interesting and distinguished, was highly
honourable to park, who was duly sensible of its value. nor was this
instance singular. the papers transmitted by his family speak of other
testimonies of respect, which, subsequently to park's return to scotland
in 1799, he received from various distinguished individuals of his own
country; and they mention, in particular, that he was very highly
gratified by some personal attentions which he received about this time
from mr. dugald stewart.

in the midst of these occupations park's thoughts were still turned upon
africa. soon after the signature of the preliminary articles of peace
with france, in october, 1801, he received a letter from sir joseph
banks, acquainting him, "that in consequence of the peace, the
association would certainly revive their project of sending a mission to
africa; in order to penetrate to, and navigate, the niger; and he added,
that in case government should enter into the plan, park would certainly
be recommended as the person proper to be employed for carrying it into
execution." but the business remained for a considerable time in
suspense; nor did any specific proposal follow this communication till
the autumn of the year 1803; when he received a letter addressed to him
from the office of the colonial secretary of state, desiring his
attendance without delay. on his arrival in london he had an interview
with the present earl of buckinghamshire, then lord hobart, and
secretary of state for the colonial department, who acquainted him with
the nature of an expedition to africa, which was about to take place,
and in which it was proposed, that park should bear a principal part. to
this offer he declined giving an immediate answer, requesting a short
time to deliberate and consult with his friends. he returned home for
this purpose about ten days afterwards.

on his return to scotland he formally consulted a few of his friends;
but, in his own mind, the point was already decided. from the time of
his interview with lord hobart, his determination was in fact taken. his
imagination had been indulging itself for some years past upon the
visions of discoveries which he was destined to make in the interior of
africa; and the object of his ambition was now within his grasp. he
hastily announced to lord hobart his acceptance of the proposal;
employed a few days in settling his affairs and taking leave of his
friends; and left scotland in december, 1803, with the confident
expectation of embarking in a very short time for the coast of africa.
but many delays were yet to take place previously to his final
departure.

the principal details of the intended expedition had been fully
considered, and in a great measure arranged, in the colonial department,
before the application was made to park; and he had therefore flattered
himself that the business was in a state of considerable forwardness.
but on his arrival in london, he was much disappointed to find that the
sailing of the expedition had been postponed; and it was not till after
two months that his departure was finally appointed for the end of
february, 1804. but, unfortunately, when this period arrived, the
apprehension of important political changes, which eventually took place
by the resignation of mr. addington a short time afterwards, caused some
embarrassment in the measures and proceedings of the administration.
after all was ready at portsmouth for the embarkation, and part of the
troops destined for the service were actually on board, the expedition
was suddenly countermanded; and the question, whether it should finally
proceed to africa or not, was reserved for the decision of lord camden,
who shortly afterwards succeeded to lord hobart in the colonial
department.

in consequence of this change, park was informed at the colonial office,
that the expedition could not possibly sail before september; and it was
suggested to him by some person in authority, that he might employ the
interval with great advantage in improving himself in the practice of
taking astronomical observations, and in acquiring some knowledge of the
arabic language. he was at the same time informed, that any reasonable
expence which he might incur in acquiring this instruction would be
reimbursed to him by government. in consequence of this intimation, he
engaged a native of mogadore, named sidi omback boubi, then residing in
london, who had served as the interpreter of elphi bey, (the ambassador
of the mamelukes from cairo) to accompany him to scotland, for the
purpose of instructing him in arabic. they immediately left london
together, and arrived early in march at peebles; where park continued to
reside together with his african instructor, till about the middle of
may. he then finally quitted his house at peebles, and took his family
to the farm at fowlshiels, where he quietly waited the expected summons
of the secretary of state. during all this time he employed himself with
great diligence in acquiring a familiar use of astronomical instruments,
and in the study of the arabic language, in which he became a tolerable
proficient.

early in september he received a letter from the under secretary of
state for the colonial department, desiring him to set off without delay
for london, and to present himself on his arrival at the colonial
office. he accordingly lost no time in settling his affairs; and taking
an affectionate leave of his family, wife, and children, quitted
fowlshiels, and arrived in london towards the latter end of september,
1804.

in the course of park's communications with the colonial office, lord
camden had intimated a desire to be furnished with a written statement
of park's opinions, both as to the plan of the expedition, and the
particular objects towards which he conceived that his attention ought
to be chiefly directed during the intended journey. in compliance with
this request, he had, during his leisure in the country, drawn up a
memoir upon these subjects, which he presented at the colonial office
within a few days after his arrival in london. as this paper formed the
ground work of the official instructions which were afterwards given to
park, and is in other respects interesting and important, it is here
inserted at length.


memoir _delivered by_ mungo park, _esq. to lord_ camden, _on the 4th of
october_, 1804.

"a particular account--1st. of the objects to which mr. park's attention
will be chiefly directed in his journey to the interior of africa: 2dly.
of the means necessary for accomplishing that journey; and 3dly. of the
manner in which he proposes to carry the plans of government into
execution.

"the objects which mr. park would constantly keep in view are, _the
extension of british commerce, and the enlargement of our geographical
knowledge_.

"in directing his enquiries with respect to commerce, he would propose
to himself the following subjects as worthy of particular investigation.

"1st. the route by which merchandize could be most easily transported to
the niger. this would be accomplished by attending to the nature of the
country, whether wooded or open; having water or not, being abundant in
provisions, or otherwise, and whether capable of furnishing the
necessary beasts of burden.

"2dly. the safety or danger of that route. this, by considering the
general character of the natives, their government, &c.; the jealousies
that european merchants would be likely to excite, and the guard that
would be necessary for the protection of the caravan.

"3dly. the return of merchandize. this by making out lists of such
articles as are produced in each district, and of such as are imported
from the neighbouring kingdoms.

"4thly. the value of merchandize. this could only be done by comparing
the articles with each other; with gold as a standard, and with european
articles in exchange.

"5thly. profits of trade. this could be ascertained by bartering one
african article for another; an european article for an african, or an
african or european article for gold.

"6thly. the extent to which such a commerce might be carried. this, by a
careful and cautious comparison of the above, connected with habits of
industry in the natives.

"mr. park would likewise turn his attention to the general fertility of
the country, whether any part of it might be useful to britain for
colonization, and whether any objects of natural history, with which the
natives are at present unacquainted, might be useful to britain as a
commercial nation.

"mr. park would propose to himself the following subjects in conducting
his geographical researches.

"1st. to ascertain the correct latitude and longitude of the different
places he visits in going to the niger.

"2dly. to ascertain, if possible, the termination of that river.

"3dly. to make as accurate a survey of the river as his situation and
circumstances will admit of.

"4thly. to give a description of the different kingdoms on or near the
hanks of the river, with an account of the manners and customs of the
inhabitants.

"means necessary for accomplishing the journey.
30 european soldiers.
6 european carpenters.
15 or 20 goree negroes, most of them artificers.
50 asses, to be purchased at st. jago
6 horses or mules, to be purchased at st. jago.

"articles of dress, &c. for the soldiers and negros, exclusive of their
common clothing.

"each man,
1 musquito veil.
1 hat with a broad brim.
2 flannel under vests with sleeves.
2 pair of mosquito trowsers.
1 pair of long leather gaiters.
1 additional pair of shoes.
1 great coat for sleeping, similar to what is worn by the cavalry.
knapsack and canteen for travelling.

"arms and ammunition.
6 rifle pieces.
8 or ten blunderbusses.

"each man,
1 gun and bayonet.
1 pair of pistols, and belt.
1 cartridge box and belt.
ball cartridges.
pistol ditto.
flints.
gunpowder.
small shot of different sizes.

"articles necessary for equipping the asses.

"100 strong sacking bags.
50 canvass saddles.
girths, buckles, halters.
6 saddles and bridles for horses.

"articles necessary for building and rigging two boats on the niger of
the following dimensions, viz.

"40 feet keel--8 feet beam, to draw 2-1/2 feet water.
carpenters tools, including hatchets and long saws.
iron work and nails.
pitch and oakum.
cordage rigging, and sails.
2 boat compasses.
2 spying-glasses for day or night.
2 small union flags.
6 dark lanterns.
2 tons of carolina rice.
cooking utensils.
medicines and instruments.

"list of merchandize for purchasing provisions and making the necessary
presents to the kings of woolli, bondou, kajaaga, fooladoo, bambarra,
and the kings of the interior.

"best blue india bafts, 150 yards
white ditto, 50 yards
scarlet cloth, 200 yards
blue ditto, 30 yards
green ditto, 20 yards
yellow ditto, 10 yards
scarlet salisbury flannel, red night caps, &c.
amber, l150
coral, l50
mock coral, l50
white garnets, l50
red garnets
red beads
black points, l50
piccadoes
gold beads
small black beads, l50
white ditto
yellow ditto
5 double-barrelled guns.
5 pairs of ditto pistols.
5 swords with belts.
small mirrors.
knives.
scissors.
spectacles,
dollars.

"_a brief account of the manner in which mr. park proposes to carry the
plans of government into execution._

"mr. park would touch at st. jago, in order to purchase the asses and
mules, and a sufficient quantity of corn to maintain them during the
voyage to goree and up the gambia. at goree he proposes receiving on
board the soldiers and negroes formerly mentioned, and would then
proceed to fattatenda, five hundred miles up the gambia; where, having
first obtained permission from the king of woolli, he would disembark
with the troops, asses, &c. after having allowed time for refreshment,
and the necessary arrangements being made, he would then proceed on his
journey to the niger. the route he intends pursuing would lead him
through the kingdoms of bondou, kajaaga, fooladoo, and bambarra.

"in conducting an expedition of this nature through such an extent of
country, mr. park is sensible that difficulties will unavoidably occur;
but he will be careful to use conciliatory measures on every occasion.
he will state to the native princes the good understanding that has
always subsisted between them and the english, and will invariably
declare that his present journey is undertaken solely for the extension
of commerce and promotion of their mutual interests.

"on his arrival at the niger his attention will be first directed to
gain the friendship of the king of bambarra. for this purpose he will
send one of the bambarra dooties forward to sego with a small present.
this man will inform mansong of our arrival in his kingdom, and that it
is our intention to come down to sego with presents to him, as soon as
he has given us permission, and we have provided the necessary means of
conveying ourselves thither.

"in the mean time we must use every possible exertion to construct the
two boats before mentioned with the utmost possible despatch. when the
boats are completed, and every thing is ready for embarking, mr. park
would dispose of the beasts of burthen; giving some away in presents,
and with the others purchasing provisions. if the king of bambarra's
answer is favourable, he would proceed immediately to sego, and having
delivered the presents, solicit mansong's protection as far as _jinnie_.
here mr. park's personal knowledge of the course of the niger ends.

"proceeding farther, mr. park proposes to survey the lake dibbie,
coasting along its southern shore. he would then proceed down the river
by jimbala and kabra (the port of tombuctoo), through the kingdoms of
houssa, nyffe, and kashna, &c. to the kingdom of _wangara_, being a
direct distance of about one thousand four hundred miles from the place
of embarkation.

"if the river should unfortunately end here, mr. park would feel his
situation extremely critical; he would however be guided by his distance
from the coast, by the character of the surrounding nations, and by the
existing circumstances of his situation.

"to return by the niger to the westward he apprehends would be
impossible; to proceed to the northward equally so; and to travel
through abyssinia extremely dangerous. the only remaining route that
holds out any hopes of success, is that towards the _bight of guinea_.
if the river should take a southerly direction, mr. park would consider
it as his duty to follow it to its termination; and if it should happily
prove to be the river congo, would there embark with the troops and
negroes on board a slave vessel, and return to england from st. helena,
or by way of the west indies.

"the following considerations have induced mr. park to think that the
congo will be found to be the termination of the niger.

"1st. the total ignorance of all the inhabitants of north africa
respecting the termination of that river. if the niger ended any where
in north africa, it is difficult to conceive how the inhabitants should
be so totally ignorant of it; and why they should so generally describe
it as running to the nile, to the end of the world, and in fact to a
country with which they are unacquainted.

"2dly. in mr. horneman's journal the niger is described as flowing
eastwards into bornou, where it takes the name of _zad_. the breadth of
the zad was given him for one mile, and he was told that it flowed
towards the egyptian nile, through the land of the _heathens_.
[footnote: proceedings of african association. vol. ii. p. 201.] the
course here given is directly towards the congo. _zad_ is the name of
the congo at its mouth, and it is the name of the congo for at least six
hundred and fifty miles inland.

"3dly. the river of _dar kulla_ mentioned by mr. browne [footnote:
browne's travels. 2d edit. 4to. p. 354.] is generally supposed to be the
niger; or at least to have a communication with that river. now this is
exactly the course the niger ought to take in order to join the congo.

"4thly. the quantity of water discharged into the atlantic by the congo
cannot be accounted for on any other known principle, but that it is the
termination of the niger. if the congo derived its waters entirely from
the south side of the mountains which are supposed to form the belt of
africa, one would naturally suppose that when the rains were confined to
the north side of the mountains, the congo, like the other rivers of
africa, would be greatly diminished in size; and that its waters would
become _pure_. on the contrary, the waters of the congo are at all
seasons thick and muddy. the breadth of the river when at its _lowest_
is _one mile_, its depth is _fifty fathoms_, and its velocity _six miles
per hour_.

"5thly. the annual flood of the congo commences before any rains have
fallen south of the equator, and agree correctly with the floods of the
niger, calculating the water to have flowed from bambarra at the rate of
three miles per hour.

"mr. park is of opinion, that when your lordship shall have duly weighed
the above reasons, you will be induced to conclude that his hopes of
returning by the congo are not altogether fanciful; and that his
expedition, though attended with extreme danger, promises to be
productive of the utmost advantage to great britain.

"considered in a commercial point of view, it is second only to the
discovery of the cape of good hope; and in a geographical point of view,
it is certainly the greatest discovery that remains to be made in this
world.

"(signed) mungo park."


the circumstance most deserving of attention in this memoir, is the
opinion expressed respecting the course and termination of the niger; a
geographical question of great difficulty and importance. in a treatise
written by major rennell expressly on the discoveries of park, that
distinguished geographer, on comparing the various accounts of the
progress of the niger beyond houssa, had given a distinct opinion that
its waters had no communication either with the river nile or the sea;
but were spread out into a great lake in wangara and ghana, and were
evaporated by the heat of the sun. [footnote: proceedings of african
association, vol. i. p. 533.] park's attention had of course been much
directed to the same subject; and he had omitted no opportunity of
collecting information which might throw light on this obscure and
difficult question. during his residence in scotland he had become
acquainted with a mr. george maxwell, formerly an african trader, who
had a great knowledge of the whole western coast of africa, especially
south of the equator, and had published a chart of the river congo.
before mr. maxwell had heard any particulars of the niger, many
circumstances had induced him to conjecture that the source of the congo
lay considerably inland, and very far to the north. the publication of
park's travels confirmed him in his opinion, and led him to conclude
that the congo and the niger were one and the same stream. mr. maxwell's
reasonings appear to have produced a great impression upon park, who
adopted his sentiments relative to the termination of the niger in their
utmost extent, and persevered in that opinion to the end of his life.

the _sources_ of great rivers have often been the object of popular and
even of scientific curiosity; but it is peculiar to the niger to be
interesting on account of its _termination_. those who recollect the
emotions which park describes himself to have experienced during his
former journey, on the first view of that mighty river, [footnote:
"while we were riding together, and i was anxiously looking around for
the river, one of the negroes called out, _geo affilli_ (see the water);
and looking forwards, i saw with infinite pleasure, the great object of
my mission, the long sought for, majestic niger, glittering to the
morning sun, as broad as the thames at westminster, and flowing slowly
_to the eastward_. i hastened to the brink and having drank of the
water, lifted up my fervent thanks in prayer to the great ruler of all
things for having thus far crowned my endeavours with success." park's
travels, p. 194.] will be enabled to form some idea of the enthusiasm on
this subject which he intimates at the close of the foregoing memoir,
and which was now become his ruling passion. nor can we be surprised
that the question, respecting the termination of the niger, associated
as it was, with so many personal feelings, had such entire possession of
park's mind; since the subject itself, considered as a matter of
geographical enquiry, is one of the most interesting that can easily be
conceived. the idea of a great river, rising in the western mountains of
africa and flowing towards the centre of that vast continent; whose
course in that direction is ascertained for a considerable distance,
beyond which information is silent, and speculation is left at large to
indulge in the wildest conjectures--has something of the _unbounded_ and
_mysterious_, which powerfully attracts curiosity and takes a strong
hold of the imagination. [footnote: see appendix, no. iv.]

       *       *       *       *       *

a short time after park had delivered his memoir at the colonial office,
he had an audience of lord camden, who expressed his general approbation
of its contents and acquainted him with the plan of the expedition, so
far as it was then determined upon. the amount of the compensation which
he was to receive for this service, was likewise agreed upon and settled
about the same time, with a commendable liberality on the part of
government, and entirely to park's satisfaction; and it was also very
properly stipulated that, in the event either of his dying before the
completion of the service, or of his not being heard of within a given
period after his setting out on the journey, a certain sum should be
paid by government as a provision for his wife and family.

but before all the details of the plan were finally determined upon,
park was desired by lord camden, to consult major rennell, and obtain
his opinion both with regard to the scheme and objects of the
expedition, and park's own sentiments relative to the niger, as stated
in his memoir. for this purpose he went to brighthelmston, where major
rennell then was, and remained with him several days; during which time,
the subjects proposed by lord camden were repeatedly discussed between
them. with respect to the supposition relative to the termination of the
niger, major rennell was unconvinced by park's reasonings, and declared
his adherence to the opinion he had formerly expressed with regard to
the course of that river. as to the plan of the intended expedition, he
was so much struck with the difficulties and dangers likely to attend
its execution, that he earnestly dissuaded park from engaging in so
hazardous an enterprize. his arguments, urged with all the warmth and
sincerity of friendship, appear to have made a great impression upon
park; and he took leave of major rennell with an apparent determination
to relinquish the undertaking. but this conviction was little more than
momentary, and ceased almost as soon as the influence and authority from
which it proceeded were withdrawn. on park's return to london, his
enthusiasm revived; and all doubts and difficulties were at an end.

the doubts expressed by major rennell were of course, communicated by
park to the secretary of state; but, as he accompanied the communication
with his own answers and remarks, the objections were not deemed of
sufficient weight to produce any material change in the intended
arrangements.

it must be observed however with regard to the opinions both of major
rennell and other intelligent persons among park's friends, who
disapproved of the expedition, that their objections appear for the most
part to have been too general and indiscriminate; proceeding perhaps too
much upon vague and indefinite ideas of the dangers which experience had
shewn to be incidental to such a journey, and being therefore equally
conclusive against _any_ new attempt to explore the interior of africa.
to these objections it may be sufficient to oppose the authority of sir
joseph banks, who was of course much consulted by park, and also by the
secretary of state; and whose opinion on this subject appears to have
been equally temperate and judicious. without in the least extenuating
the dangers of the intended expedition, which he regarded as one of the
most hazardous ever undertaken, he still thought that the dangers were
not greater than might reasonably be encountered for the sake of very
important objects; justly observing that it was only from similar risks
of human life that great geographical discoveries were in general to be
expected. the correctness of his opinion was sufficiently shewn by the
event; since it will hereafter appear that the failure of the
undertaking was owing rather to accidental circumstances than to any
defect in the original plan of the expedition itself.

after due consideration, it was at length finally determined that the
expedition should consist of park himself, his brother in law mr.
alexander anderson, who was to be next to park in authority, and mr.
george scott, who was to act as a draftsman; together with a few boat
builders and artificers. they were not to be accompanied by any troops
from england; but were to be joined at goree by a certain number of
soldiers of the african corps stationed in that garrison, who might be
disposed to volunteer for the service.

mr. anderson and mr. scott, the associates of park in this expedition,
were intelligent and excellent young men; the former a surgeon of
several years' experience, the latter an artist of very promising
talents. they were both of them friends and fellow countrymen of park
(being natives of the county of selkirk), and inspired by him with a
great ardour for the undertaking in which they were about to engage.

the expedition being thus limited as to its nature and objects, and
nothing more being necessary than to procure a proper assortment of
stores and commercial articles, and provide the means of conveying the
party with their small cargo to the coast of africa; it was to be
expected that the mission might be sent out immediately, or with very
little delay. this indeed was an object of great importance, considering
the advanced time of the year; it being obvious that if the expedition
should be detained for any considerable time, it might have the effect
of postponing the journey into the interior to the period of the rainy
season, and thus perhaps, of rendering the whole plan abortive. fully
aware of this danger, park was anxious and earnest in his endeavours to
obtain the necessary orders from the several public departments. but,
partly from unforeseen circumstances, and partly from official forms and
the pressure of business deemed of greater importance, he was destined
to experience a long succession of delays; which, though certainly
unintentional, and perhaps in some degree unavoidable, were ultimately
productive of very unfortunate results. nor was it till after waiting
two months, (a period of great uneasiness and mortification) that he
received his official instructions: after which nearly another month
elapsed before he could set sail from england.

the instructions given to park were communicated to him in a letter
addressed to him by the secretary of state, in the following terms.


_downing-street, 2d january, 1805._

sir,

"it being judged expedient that a small expedition should be sent into
the interior of africa, with a view to discover and ascertain whether
any, and what commercial intercourse can be opened therein for the
mutual benefit of the natives and of his majesty's subjects, i am
commanded by the king to acquaint you, that on account of the knowledge
you have acquired of the nations of africa, and from the indefatigable
exertions and perseverance you displayed in your travels among them, his
majesty has selected you for conducting this undertaking.

"for better enabling you to execute this service his majesty has granted
you the brevet commission of a captain in africa, and has also granted a
similar commission of lieutenant to mr. alexander anderson, whom you
have recommended as a proper person to accompany you. mr. scott has also
been selected to attend you as draftsman. you are hereby empowered to
enlist with you for this expedition any number you think proper of the
garrison at goree, not exceeding forty-five, which the commandant of
that island will be ordered to place under your command, giving them
such bounties or encouragement, as may be necessary to induce them
cheerfully to join with you on the expedition.

"and you are hereby authorised to engage by purchase or otherwise, such
a number of black artificers at goree as you shall judge necessary for
the objects you have in view.

"you are to be conveyed to goree in a transport convoyed by his
majesty's sloop eugenie, which will be directed to proceed with you in
the first instance to st. jago, in order that you may there purchase
fifty asses for carrying your baggage.

"when you shall have prepared whatever may be necessary for securing the
objects of the expedition at goree, you are to proceed up the river
gambia; and thence crossing over to the senegal to march by such route
as you shall find most eligible, to the banks of the niger.

"the great object of your journey will be to pursue the course of this
river to the utmost possible distance to which it can be traced; to
establish communication and intercourse with the different nations on
the banks; to obtain all the local knowledge in your power respecting
them; and to ascertain the various points stated in the memoir which you
delivered to me on the 4th of october last.

"and you will be then at liberty to pursue your route homewards by any
line you shall think most secure, either by taking a new direction
through the interior towards the atlantic, or by marching upon cairo by
taking the route leading to tripoli.

"you are hereby empowered to draw for any sum that you may be in want
of, not exceeding l5000. upon the lords of his majesty's treasury, or
upon such mercantile banking-house in london as you may fix upon.

                      "i am, &c.

                                           "camden.

"_to mungo park, esq.
&c. &c. &c._"


the preparations for the expedition being now entirely completed, park,
together with mr. anderson and mr. scott, proceeded to portsmouth, where
they were joined by four or five artificers, from the dock-yards
appointed for the service; and after waiting some time for a wind, they
at last set sail in the crescent transport, on the 30th of january,
1805, and arrived at port praya bay in the cape verd islands about the
8th of march. the transactions of park from the time of his embarkation
in england to his departure from kayee on the gambia for the interior of
africa (a period of about seven weeks) will be best described by the
following letters, and extracts selected from his correspondence.


_to mr. dickson_

_port praya bay, st. jago, march 13, 1805._

"we have had a very tedious passage to this place, having been pestered
with contrary winds, strong gales, and french privateers. we have all of
us kept our health remarkably well, considering the very great change of
climate. mr. anderson has the rheumatism in his knee, but is getting
better. mr. scott is off this morning for the interior of the island, to
take sketches; and as soon as i have finished this letter i am going on
shore to finish my purchase of asses. i bought all the corn, &c. last
night, and twenty-four asses, and i shall purchase thirty-two more to
day; so you see we shall not be detained here. we shall have taken in
all the water today, and the first division of the asses will come on
board to-morrow. we expect to sail for goree on saturday or sunday.

"i have been so much employed that i have had no time as yet to look
after plants; indeed this seems a very unfavourable season of the year
for natural history, the whole country being quite dry and withered. i
have collected some observations on the present state of the cape verd
islands, which i will send home by the sloop of war.

"if sir joseph enquires after me, tell him that i am going on as well as
i could wish; and if i have as little trouble at goree as i am likely to
have here, i hope to be able to date a letter from the niger by the 4th
of june."


_to mrs. park._

_goree, 4th april, 1805._

"i have just now learnt that an american ship sails from this place for
england in a few days; and i readily embrace the opportunity of sending
a letter to my dearest wife. we have all of us kept our health very well
ever since our departure from england. alexander had a touch of the
rheumatism at st. jago, but is now quite recovered; he danced several
country dances at the ball last night. george scott is also in good
health and spirits. i wrote to you from st. jago, which letter i hope
you received. we left that place on the 21st of march, and arrived here
with the asses on the 28th. almost every soldier in the garrison,
volunteered to go with me; and with the governor's assistance i have
chosen a guard of the best men in the place. so lightly do the people
here think of the danger attending the undertaking, that i have been
under the necessity of refusing several military and naval officers who
volunteered to accompany me. we shall sail for gambia on friday or
saturday. i am happy to learn that karfa, my old friend, is at present
at jonkakonda; and i am in hopes we shall be able to hire him to go with
us.

"we have as yet been extremely fortunate, and have got our business both
at st. jago and this place finished with great success: and i have
hopes, almost to certainty, that providence will so dispose the tempers
and passions of the inhabitants of this quarter of the world, that we
shall be enabled to _slide through_ much more smoothly than you expect.

"i need not tell you how often i think about you; your own feelings will
enable you to judge of that. the hopes of spending the remainder of my
life with my wife and children will make every thing seem easy; and you
may be sure i will not rashly risk my life, when i know that your
happiness, and the welfare of my young ones depend so much upon it. i
hope my mother does not torment herself with unnecessary fears about me.
i sometimes fancy how you and she will be meeting misfortune half way,
and placing me in many distressing situations. i have as yet experienced
nothing but success, and i hope that six months more will end the whole
as i wish."

"p.s. we have taken a ride this morning about twelve miles into the
country. alexander is much pleased with it; the heat is moderate, and
the country healthy at present."


_to edward cooke, esq. under secretary of state for the colonial
department._

_jillifree, river gambia,
april 9th, 1805._

"sir,

"it is with great pleasure that i embrace this opportunity of sending
you a general account of our proceedings since leaving england.

"we had a very tedious passage to the cape verd islands, being detained
by storms and contrary winds in the bay of biscay, so that we did not
reach st. jago till the 8th of march. i immediately set about purchasing
the asses, corn, hay, &c. and succeeded so well that on the 18th i had
embarked forty-four asses with plenty of corn and hay. the master of the
transport declared that he could not receive any more consistently with
the safety of the vessel. we sailed for goree on the 21st. while we were
getting under way, six english ships of the line, one of them a three
decker, came into the bay. they did not hail us; one of them had an
admiral's blue flag at the mizen.

"we made the coast of africa on the 25th, and anchored in goree roads on
the morning of the 28th. i immediately went on shore, and having
delivered the dispatches to major lloyd, consulted with him respecting
the proper encouragement to be offered to the troops. we agreed that
nothing would be so great an inducement as double pay during the
journey, and a discharge on their return. a garrison order to this
effect was accordingly made out; and in the course of a few days almost
every soldier in the garrison had volunteered his services. lieutenant
martyn of the royal artillery corps having likewise volunteered, i
thought it would be of consequence to have an officer who was acquainted
with the men, and who could assist me in choosing such as were best able
to stand fatigue. i therefore accepted his services on the conditions
mentioned in lord camden's letter. captain shortland, of the squirrel
frigate, has allowed two of his best seamen to go with me as volunteers
in order to assist in rigging and navigating our _nigritian men of war_.
i have given them the same encouragement as the soldiers, and have had
the four carpenters whom i brought from england attested, in order to
put the whole under the same discipline and regulations.

"on the morning of the 6th of april we embarked the soldiers, in number
thirty-five men. they jumped into the boats in the highest spirits, and
bade adieu to goree with repeated huzzas. i believe that every man in
the garrison would have embarked with great cheerfulness; but no
inducement could prevail on a single negro to accompany me. i must
therefore trust to the gambia for interpreters, and i expect to be able
to hire or purchase three or four in going up the river. i will send a
particular account of all money matters by the return of the transport."

mungo park.


_to sir joseph banks._

_kayee, river gambia,
april 26th, 1805._

"my dear friend,

"i know that you will be pleased to hear that i am in good health, and
going forwards with as much success as i could reasonably expect. in my
letter to lord camden, i have given a short statement of my transactions
since i left england, which i have requested his lordship to shew to
you. by that you will see that i have had but little time to attend to
objects of natural history; but lest you should think that i have
neglected this pursuit entirely, i have sent a few specimens in a trunk,
which i hope will come safe; the most remarkable are,

"1st. the _fang jani_, or self-burning tree of gambia. this grows
plentifully on the banks of the gambia betwixt yanimaroo and kayee, and
no where else. it is certainly burnt by some internal process, of which
i am ignorant. few of the natives have seen it actually burning; but
every person who has sailed up the gambia will allow that these bushes
are burnt in places where no human being could set them on fire, and
where the grass around them was not burnt. i have sent you a burnt
stump, two tops, and a fruit.

"2d. the _kino_, (so called by the natives), a branch and fruit of the
original gum kino tree and a paper of the real gum; none of this gum is
at present exported from gambia, though it might be collected in some
quantity.

"3d. the _tribo_, a root with which the natives dye their leather of a
yellow colour. it is not in flower at this season. [footnote: see
appendix, no. v.]

"the wars which at present prevail in bondou and kasson, have prevented
the merchants from bringing down the _shea_ butter; otherwise i would
have sent you a pot of it. i have sent you as a specimen of african
manufactures, a mandingo cloth dyed from the _leaves_ of the indigo,
half a dozen small pots, and some lefa's or calabash covers. i regret
that i have not been able to procure any bondou _frankincense_.--give my
compliments to major rennell, and tell him that i hope to be able to
correct my former errors. the course of the gambia is certainly not so
long as is laid down in the charts. the watch goes so correctly that i
will measure africa by feet and inches.

"in case any unfavourable reports should be raised respecting the
termination of our journey, i request that you will endeavour as much as
you can to prevent them from finding their way into the newspapers, or
by any other manner reaching the ears of my dear wife and mother."


_to mrs. park._

_kayee, river gambia, april 26, 1805._

"i have been busy these three days in making preparations for our
journey, and i feel rather uneasy when i think that i can receive no
letters from you till i return to england; but you may depend on this,
that i will avail myself of every opportunity of writing to you, though
from the very nature of the undertaking these opportunities will be but
few. we set off for the interior tomorrow morning; and i assure you,
that whatever the issue of the present journey may be, every thing looks
favourable. we have been successful thus far, beyond my highest
expectations.

"the natives instead of being frightened at us, look on us as their best
friends, and the kings have not only granted us protection, but sent
people to go before us. the soldiers are in the highest spirits; and as
many of them (like me) have left a wife and family in england, they are
happy to embrace this opportunity of returning. they never think about
difficulties; and i am confident, if there was occasion for it, that
they would defeat any number of negroes that might come against us; but
of this we have not the most distant expectation. the king of kataba
(the most powerful king in gambia) visited us on board the crescent on
the 20th and 21st; he has furnished us with a messenger to conduct us
safely to the king of woolli.

"i expect to have an opportunity of writing to you from konkodoo or
bammakoo, by some of the slave traders; but as they travel very slowly,
i may probably have returned to the coast before any of my letters have
reached goree; at any rate, you need not be surprised if you should not
hear from me for some months; nay, so uncertain is the communication
between africa and england, that perhaps the next news you may hear, may
be my arrival in the latter, which i still think will be in the month of
december. if we have to go round by the west indies, it will take us two
months more; but as government has given me an unlimited credit, if a
vessel is coming direct, i shall of course take a passage in her. i have
enjoyed excellent health, and have great hopes to bring this expedition
to a happy conclusion. in five weeks from the date of this letter the
worst part of the journey will be over. kiss all my dear children for
me, and let them know that their father loves them."


in a letter to mr. dickson dated kayee, april 26th, 1805, the day before
his embarkation, park writes as follows;

"every thing, at present, looks as favourable as i could wish, and if
all things go well, this day six weeks i expect to drink all your
healths in the water of the niger. the soldiers are in good health and
spirits. they are the most _dashing_ men i ever saw; and if they
preserve their health, we may keep ourselves perfectly secure from any
hostile attempt on the part of the natives. i have little doubt but that
i shall be able with presents and fair words to pass through the country
to the niger; and if once we are fairly afloat, _the day is won_.--give
my kind regards to sir joseph and mr. greville; and if they should think
that i have paid too little attention to natural objects, you may
mention that i had forty men and forty-two asses to look after, besides
the constant trouble of packing and weighing bundles, palavering with
the negroes, and laying plans for our future success. i never was so
busy in my life."

on reading this correspondence it is impossible not to be struck with
the satisfaction expressed by park, and the confidence with which he
appears to have looked forward to a favourable termination of his
journey. yet in reality nothing could be much less promising than his
actual situation and prospects at the time of writing these letters.

the detachment of the royal african corps, which was to escort the
expedition, consisted of a lieutenant and thirty-five privates. it was
not to be expected that troops of a very superior quality could be
furnished from a regiment which had been serving for any considerable
time at a tropical station, such as goree. but there is too much reason
to believe that the men selected on the present occasion,
notwithstanding the favourable opinion of them expressed by park, and
although they were the best that the garrison could supply, were below
the ordinary standard even of troops of this description; and that they
were extremely deficient both in constitutional strength and vigour, and
in those habits of sobriety, steadiness and good discipline which such a
service peculiarly required.

but besides the indifferent quality of the troops, there was another and
more serious cause of alarm, from the unfavourable period at which,
owing to a series of unforeseen delays, park found himself obliged to
enter on this expedition. this he was about to do, not actually during
the rainy season; but with a great probability of being overtaken by it
in the course of his journey; and with a positive certainty of
encountering in the mean time, not only the great tropical heats, but
also the _tornadoes_, or hurricanes, which always precede and follow the
rainy season. these hurricanes, of which no idea can be formed from the
experience of our temperate climates, occur more frequently, and with
greater violence as the rainy period approaches; and are attended with
considerable inconvenience, and occasionally with danger, to caravans
travelling at that season.

whatever might be the opinion of park as to the quality of his troops,
of which he appears to have formed a very erroneous estimate, he must at
least have been fully aware of the disadvantage arising from the near
approach of the great tropical rains. but his situation was critical;
and he had only a choice of difficulties. he might either attempt (what
he might perhaps consider as being just _possible_) to reach the niger
before the rainy season should be completely set in; or he might
postpone his journey till the return of the proper season for
travelling, which would be in november or december following. the event
has shewn that he would have acted more wisely in deferring the
expedition. but the motives which might lead him to a contrary
determination, were obvious and powerful; and will be found, on the
whole, sufficient for the justification of his conduct. he must
naturally have considered that the postponement of the expedition _for
seven months_, besides being in the greatest degree irksome both to
himself and the companions of his journey, would occasion a great
additional expense, and disappoint the expectations of government; and
he might perhaps entertain doubts, since the case was not provided for
by his official instructions, whether he should altogether escape
censure, if he should postpone his journey for so long a period, under
any circumstances much short of a positive and undoubted necessity.

in this difficult situation, he adopted that alternative which was most
congenial to his character and feelings; and having once formed this
resolution, he adhered to it with tranquillity and firmness; dismissing
from his own mind all doubts and apprehensions, or at least effectually
concealing them, from the companions of his journey, and from his
friends and correspondents in england.

       *       *       *       *       *

for the particulars of this second expedition, the reader must be
referred to the journal now published, which commences from this period.
but in order to give a general view of the extent of park's labours, it
may be useful on this, as on the former occasion, to note the more
important dates, and some of the principal circumstances of the journey.

the persons composing the expedition, being assembled at kayee, a small
town on the gambia a little below pisania, park engaged a mandingo
priest, named isaaco, who was also a travelling merchant and much
accustomed to long inland journies, to serve as the guide to his
caravan. on the 27th of april 1805, he took his departure from kayee,
and arrived in two days at pisania, from whence he had set out for the
interior of africa nearly ten years before. some of the practical
difficulties of the march were apparent during this short journey: and
he found it necessary to stop at pisania six days (a delay which must
have been highly inconvenient), to purchase additional beasts of burden,
and make other arrangements for the expedition.

he quitted kayee on the 4th of may, and arrived on the 11th at madina,
the capital of the kingdom of woolli. the effects of the season had
already become apparent; two of the soldiers having fallen ill of the
dysentery on the 8th. on the 15th he arrived on the banks of the gambia;
and about this time lost one of his soldiers, by an epilepsy.

on the 26th, the caravan experienced a singular accident (almost
unintelligible to an european) from the attack of a large swarm of bees;
in consequence of which, besides that many of the people were most
severely stung, seven of their beasts of burden perished or were lost;
and owing to an accidental fire which was kindled in the confusion, the
whole baggage was near being burnt. for half an hour it seemed as if the
bees had put an end to the expedition. [footnote: a similar accident
from an attack of bees, though much less serious than the present, was
witnessed by park in his journey with the caravan of slaves from kamalia
to the gambia, and is described in his travels, p. 331.]

on the 28th of may, park arrived at badoo, where he mentions having had
an opportunity of sending two letters to england by way of the gambia.
these letters were addressed to sir joseph banks and mrs. park; and are
as follows.


_to sir joseph banks._

_badoo, near tambacunda, may 28th, 1805._

"a slatee is going from this place in a few hours for the gambia, and i
have hired him to stop his asses till i write a few lines. we have had
as prosperous an expedition thus far, as i could have expected; a short
abridgement of our journey will serve to shew where we are.

[here follow the names of the places where the caravan rested each
night; the particulars of which are fully detailed in the journal.]

"we are going this evening to tambacunda. you must not imagine, my dear
friend, from this hasty sketch that i have neglected astronomical
observations; i have observed the latitude every two or three days, and
have observed three eclipses of jupiter's satellites, which settle the
longitude, by the help of the watch, to the nearest mile. i saw plenty
of shea trees yesterday for the first time since my return to africa,
the fruit being not yet ripe. the course of the gambia is laid down on
my chart too much to the south; i have ascertained nearly its whole
course. i find that my former journeys on foot were underrated; some of
them surprise myself, when i trace the same road on horseback.
sibikillin is 36' east of where it is laid down on the chart. i propose
sending an abridged account of my day's transactions from baniserile, to
lord camden; but i request that nothing may be published till i return
to england. a short time will decide the matter.

"i expect to reach the niger on the 27th of june. you must excuse this
hasty scrawl, as it is only meant to let you know that i am still alive
and going forward in my journey. please to let mrs. dickson know that i
am well."


_to mrs. park,_

_badoo, 29th may, 1805._

"i am happy to inform you that we are half through our journey without
the smallest accident or unpleasant circumstance. we all of us keep our
health, and are on the most friendly terms with the natives. i have seen
many of my old acquaintances, and am every where well received. by the
27th of june we expect to have finished all our travels by land; and
when we have once got afloat on the river, we shall conclude that we are
embarking for england. i have never had the smallest sickness; and
alexander is quite free from all his stomach complaints.

"the bearer of this to the gambia is waiting with his asses for a few
minutes only; you will therefore inform all friends that we are well and
going on prosperously. i see no reason to think that our stay in the
interior will be longer than i first mentioned.

"we carry our own victuals with us, and live very well; in fact we have
only had a pleasant journey, and yet this is what we thought would be
the worst part of it.

"i will indulge the hope that my wife, children, and all friends are
well. i am in great hopes of finishing this journey with credit in a few
months; and then with what joy shall i turn my face towards home! the
slatee is impatient for the letter; and i have only time to subscribe
myself, &c."


notwithstanding these letters, it is evident from park's journal that
his situation was now very critical. the tornadoes had begun to be
frequent; and a few days afterwards it became quite apparent that the
rainy season was seriously setting in, before the journey to the niger
was more than half completed. the effect produced on the health of the
soldiers by a violent rain on the 10th of june, was almost
instantaneous; twelve of them at once were dangerously ill, and from
this time the great mortality commenced, which was ultimately fatal to
the expedition.

at shrondo, in the kingdom of dentila, where the caravan shortly
afterwards arrived, there are considerable gold mines; and the journal
contains a minute and interesting description both of the manner of
collecting the metal, and of the country in which it is found.

after quitting shrondo, park mentions that on the 12th of june, in
consequence of a very sudden tornado, they were forced to carry their
bundles into the huts of the natives, being the first time that the
caravan had entered a town since leaving the gambia. considering the
_climate_ and season, this slight circumstance is alone a sufficient
proof of the hardships which must have been sustained by europeans
during such a journey.

at dindikoo beyond shrondo, park was much struck with the beauty and
magnificence of that mountainous tract of country, as well as with the
degree in which it was cultivated and the comparatively happy condition
of the inhabitants. proceeding a little farther, he quitted the track he
had hitherto followed, by which he had formerly returned from kamalia to
the gambia; and directed his course towards the north-east, with a view
probably of avoiding the jallonka wilderness. but the difficulties of
travelling were now become extreme; partly from the nature of the
country, but principally from the increasing prevalence of the disease
produced by the continued rains.

on the 4th of july he was near losing isaaco, his guide; who in crossing
a river was twice attacked by a crocodile, and saved himself by
extraordinary presence of mind, though not without some very severe
wounds. this accident detained the caravan several days, and added to
the numerous delays which had so unfortunately impeded the expedition.

several of the soldiers had died during the course of the journey; and
on the 6th of july the whole number of persons composing the caravan
(except one) were either actually sick, or in a state of great debility.
yet he still had considerable difficulties to encounter, in traversing a
country, where he was obliged to be constantly on the watch against the
depredations of the inhabitants, and occasionally, the attacks of wild
beasts. under such circumstances it is not wonderful that the few
soldiers, not disabled by sickness, fell back; and it was with great
difficulty that any of them could be prevailed on to continue their
march. after a series of dangers and sufferings, such as have been
experienced by few travellers, he at length reached the niger (at
bambakoo, where the river begins to be navigable) on the 19th of august
1805.

this was more than seven weeks beyond the time, upon which he had
calculated when he quitted the gambia; and the effects of this
protracted march, which had carried him far into the rainy season, were
unfortunately but too apparent. of the europeans who composed the
expedition, consisting of about forty at the time of quitting the
gambia, there were now only eleven survivors. of these the principal
persons, besides park, namely mr. anderson, mr. scott, and lieutenant
martyn, were all more or less affected by the disease; the two former
very seriously, and mr. scott, in particular, to so great a degree that
he had been obliged to remain behind, and died shortly afterwards
without reaching the niger.

it was fortunate that park's health had hitherto been very slightly
affected, since the whole burden of the expedition evidently rested upon
him. he not only directed all the great movements of the caravan, but
superintended its minutest details, and was foremost on all occasions
requiring physical strength and great personal exertions. in these
arduous services both of body and mind, mr. anderson and his other
associates, who might have been expected to share in his labours, were
incapable of rendering him any useful assistance; and by their continued
ill health, contributed in no small degree to the anxiety and
embarrassments attending the expedition.

being thus arrived at the niger, he embarked upon that river on the 21st
of august, and the following day reached marraboo; from whence he
shortly afterwards dispatched isaaco to sego, the capital of bambarra,
to negociate with mansong the sovereign, for a free passage through his
dominions and for such other facilities as might enable him to prosecute
his journey into the interior. he remained at marraboo, waiting isaaco's
return; and in the mean time was seized with the dysentery, which had
been fatal to so many of his followers; but saved himself by a bold and
vigorous course of medicine, which, aided by the great strength of his
constitution, restored him to health very speedily.

after much negociation and many difficulties with mansong's ministers,
he was at first permitted to go to samee in the neighbourhood of sego,
and afterwards to sansanding; in order to build a vessel and make
preparations for his voyage down the niger. in this negociation, which
is fully detailed in the journal, park appears to much advantage. his
speech to mansong's messengers, explaining the purpose and objects of
his expedition into africa, is distinguished by great propriety and good
sense; and affords a very favourable specimen of his talents for such
transactions. [footnote: journal, p. 151.]

it may be recollected that when park arrived at sego during his former
journey, mansong sent him a present of five thousand cowries, but
refused to admit him into his presence, and gave directions that he
should immediately depart from that city. [footnote: park's travels, p.
199.] this conduct in a sovereign apparently tolerant and liberal, was
very reasonably attributed by park to an apprehension on the part of
mansong, that he should be unable to protect him against the inveterate
malice of his moorish subjects. there is every reason to think that
mansong, on the present occasion, was actuated by similar feelings;
since he neither saw park, nor expressed any desire to see him; and his
whole conduct, both during the negociation and afterwards, indicated
great coldness and reserve. it appears also that many rumours
unfavourable to the mission were industriously circulated; and that
great jealousies, stimulated both by religious bigotry and the
apprehension of commercial rivalship, were excited against park among
the moorish inhabitants of sego and sansanding.

the anxiety and suspense produced in park's mind by these rumours, were
in some degree removed by the arrival of bookari, the singing man or
_bard_ of mansong, with six canoes, being commissioned to attend him to
the neighbourhood of sego. under this escort, he embarked at marraboo on
the 13th of september; and notwithstanding the unsatisfactory state of
his affairs, his mind was sufficiently at ease to receive great delight
from this short voyage down the niger. "nothing," he says, "can be more
beautiful than the views of this immense river; sometimes as smooth as a
mirror; at other times ruffled by a gentle breeze; but at all times
wafting us along at the rate of six or seven miles an hour." [footnote:
journal, p. 148] after the indifference shewn towards him by mansong, he
thought it not prudent to visit sego; but went on to sansanding, a place
a little eastwards of sego on the banks of the niger, containing about
ten thousand inhabitants. here park remained the greater part of two
months, and traded to a considerable extent; and as this was the first
african town distant from the coast, at which he had an opportunity of
residing, he had the means of obtaining much information; which if it
could be communicated to the public, would probably form an important
addition to our knowledge of the internal state of africa.

fortunately the information thus acquired has not been entirely lost to
the world; a few particulars, the fruit of his active and intelligent
curiosity, still remain. the view which park has given of the trade and
population of sansanding, must be considered as the most original and
valuable part of his journal. the information which he has collected
concerning _prices_, is new in its kind, and in several points of view,
highly curious and important. but there are other circumstances, which
must strike every intelligent reader as being more peculiarly
interesting and instructive; the existence of regular markets; the
division of labour, appearing from the establishment of distinct
branches of trade; the variety of articles exposed to sale; and the
great extent of commercial transactions. these facts imply that industry
is protected, and property in a certain degree secure; and fully confirm
park's former statements with regard to the comparative civilization and
improvement of the _interior_ of africa.

one of park's principal objects at sansanding was to provide a proper
vessel for his farther navigation down the niger; and it was with great
difficulty that he procured two indifferent and decayed canoes; from
which _by the labour of his own hands_, with some assistance from one of
the surviving soldiers, he constructed a flat-bottomed vessel, to which
he gave the magnificent title of his majesty's schooner the joliba.

previously to this time, park had received intelligence of the death of
mr. scott, whom he had been obliged to leave at koomikoomi, on his march
towards the niger; and now whilst he was employed in building his
vessel, he had to lament the loss of his friend mr. anderson, who died
on the 28th of october, after a lingering illness of four months. he
speaks of this severe blow in his journal very shortly, but in a strain
of natural eloquence, flowing evidently from the heart, "no event," he
says, "during the journey, ever threw the smallest gloom over his mind
till he laid mr. anderson in the grave; he then felt himself as if left
a second time lonely and friendless amidst the wilds of africa."
[footnote: journal, p. 163.]

fancy can hardly picture a situation more perilous than that of park at
this time, nor an enterprise more utterly hopeless than that which he
was now to undertake. of the europeans who had accompanied him from the
gambia, lieutenant martyn and three soldiers (one of them in a state of
mental derangement) were all who now survived. he was about to embark on
a vast and unknown river, which might possibly terminate in some great
lake or inland sea, at an immense distance from the coast; but which he
hoped and believed would conduct him to the shores of the atlantic,
after a course of considerably more than three thousand miles, through
the midst of savage nations, and probably also after a long succession
of rapids, lakes, and cataracts. this voyage, one of the most formidable
ever attempted, was to be undertaken in a crazy and ill appointed
vessel, manned by a few negroes and four europeans!

on the 16th of november the schooner being completed, and every
preparation made for the voyage, park put the finishing hand to his
journal; and in the course of the succeeding days previous to the
embarkation, which appears to have taken place on the 19th, he wrote
letters to his father-in-law, mr. anderson, sir joseph banks, lord
camden, and mrs. park. those addressed to the three latter, being the
most interesting, are here inserted at length, and cannot be read
without considerable interest. they all of them bear strong traces of
that deliberate courage without effort or ostentation, which
distinguished his whole conduct; and his letter to lord camden breathes
a generous spirit of self-devotion, highly expressive of the character
and feelings of the writer.


_to sir joseph banks._

_sansanding, november 16, 1805._

"my dear friend,

"i should be wanting in gratitude, if i did not avail myself of every
opportunity of informing you how i have succeeded in this enterprise. i
have sent an account of each day's proceeding to lord camden, and have
requested his lordship to send it to you for your perusal.

"with respect to my future views, it is my intention to keep the middle
of the river, and make the best use i can of winds and currents till i
reach the termination of this mysterious stream. i have hired a guide to
go with me to _kashna_; he is a native of kasson, but one of the
greatest travellers in this part of africa, having visited _miniana,
kong, baedoo, gotto, and cape corse castle_ to the south, and
_tombuctoo, houssa, nyffe, kashna, and bornou_ towards the east. he says
that the niger, after it passes kashna, runs directly to the right hand,
or the south; he never heard of any person who had seen its termination;
and is certain that it does not end any where in the vicinity of kashna
or bornou, having resided some time in both these kingdoms.

"he says our voyage to kashna will occupy two months; that we touch on
the moors no where but at tombuctoo; the north bank of the river in all
other places being inhabited by a race of people resembling the moors in
colour, called _surka, mahinga, and tuarick_, according to the different
kingdoms they inhabit. i have as yet had only two conversations with my
guide, and they were chiefly occupied in adjusting money matters; but i
have no doubt that i shall find him a very useful fellow traveller.

"i have purchased some fresh _shea nuts_, which i intend taking with me
to the west indies, as we shall probably have to go there on our way
home. i expect that we shall reach the sea in three months from this;
and if we are lucky enough to find a vessel, we shall lose no time on
the coast. but at all events you will probably hear from me; as i mean
to write from kashna by my guide, and endeavour to hire some of the
merchants to carry a letter to the north from that place. with best
wishes for your health and prosperity i am, &c."

"p. s. have the goodness to remember me most kindly to my friend major
rennell."


_to the earl camden, one of his majesty's principal secretaries of
state, &c. &c. &c._

_on board of h. m. schooner joliba,
at anchor off sansanding,
november 17, 1805._

"my lord,

"i have herewith sent you an account of each day's proceedings since we
left _kayee_. many of the incidents related are in themselves extremely
trifling; but are intended to recall to my recollection (if it pleases
god to restore me again to my dear native land) other particulars
illustrative of the manners and customs of the natives, which would have
swelled this bulky communication to a most unreasonable size.

"your lordship will recollect that i always spoke of the rainy season
with horror, as being extremely fatal to europeans; and our journey from
the gambia to the niger will furnish a melancholy proof of it.

"we had no contest whatever with the natives, nor was any one of us
killed by wild animals or any other accidents; and yet i am sorry to say
that of forty-four europeans who left the gambia in perfect health, five
only are at present alive, viz. three soldiers (one deranged in his
mind) lieutenant martyn, and myself.

"from this account i am afraid that your lordship will be apt to
consider matters as in a very hopeless state; but i assure you i am far
from desponding. with the assistance of one of the soldiers i have
changed a large canoe into a tolerably good schooner, on board of which
i this day hoisted the british flag, and shall set sail to the east with
the fixed resolution to discover the termination of the niger or perish
in the attempt. i have heard nothing that i can depend on respecting the
remote course of this mighty stream; but i am more and more inclined to
think that it can end no where but in the sea.

"my dear friend mr. anderson and likewise mr. scott are both dead; but
though all the europeans who are with me should die, and though i were
myself half dead, i would still persevere; and if i could not succeed in
the object of my journey, i would at last die on the niger.

"if i succeed in the object of my journey, i expect to be in england in
the month of may or june by way of the west indies.

"i request that your lordship will have the goodness to permit my friend
sir joseph banks to peruse the abridged account of my proceedings, and
that it may be preserved, in case i should lose my papers.

"i have the honour to be, &c."


_to mrs. park._

_sansanding, 19th november, 1805._

"it grieves me to the heart to write any thing that may give you
uneasiness; but such is the will of him who _doeth all things well_!
your brother alexander, my dear friend, is no more! he died of the fever
at sansanding, on the morning of the 28th of october; for particulars i
must refer you to your father.

"i am afraid that, impressed with a woman's fears and the anxieties of a
wife, you may be led to consider my situation as a great deal worse than
it really is. it is true, my dear friends, mr. anderson and george
scott, have both bid adieu to the things of this world; and the greater
part of the soldiers have died on the march during the rainy season; but
you may believe me, i am in good health. the rains are completely over,
and the healthy season has commenced, so that there is no danger of
sickness; and i have still a sufficient force to protect me from any
insult in sailing down the river, to the sea.

"we have already embarked all our things, and shall sail the moment i
have finished this letter. i do not intend to stop or land any where,
till we reach the coast: which i suppose will be some time in the end of
january. we shall then embark in the first vessel for england. if we
have to go round by the west indies, the voyage will occupy three months
longer; so that we expect to be in england on the first of may. the
reason of our delay since we left the coast was the rainy season, which
came on us during the journey; and almost all the soldiers became
affected with the fever.

"i think it not unlikely but i shall be in england before you receive
this--you may be sure that i feel happy at turning my face towards home.
we this morning have done with all intercourse with the natives; and the
sails are now hoisting for our departure for the coast."


       *       *       *       *       *

here all authentic information concerning park unfortunately terminates.
his letters and journal were brought by isaaco to the gambia, and
transmitted from thence to england. for some time nothing farther was
heard of the expedition; but in the course of the year 1806 unfavourable
accounts were brought by the native traders from the interior of africa
to the british settlements on the coast; and it was currently reported,
but upon no distinct authority, that park and his companions were
killed. these rumours increasing, and no intelligence of park being
received, lieutenant colonel maxwell, then governor of senegal (at
present governor of sierra leone), obtained permission from government
to send a proper person to ascertain the truth of the reports; and he
was fortunate enough to engage isaaco, park's guide, to go upon this
mission.

isaaco left senegal in january 1810, and was absent about twenty months.
he returned on the 1st of september 1811, with a full confirmation of
the reports concerning park's death. as the result of his enquiries into
this subject, he delivered to the governor a journal of his whole
proceedings kept by himself in the arabic language, including another
journal which he had received from amadi fatouma, the guide who had
accompanied park from sansanding down the niger. a translation of this
singular document was made at senegal by the directions of colonel
maxwell, and transmitted by him to the secretary of state for the
colonial department.

on the subject of this journal, so far as it immediately relates to
park's death, very few remarks will be necessary. being originally
written by a native african, and translated by some person who probably
had but a moderate knowledge of the arabian dialect in which it is
composed, it is far from being always clear or even intelligible; and in
the state in which it now appears, it is open to much observation.
neither indeed can it be considered in itself as a document of a very
authentic or satisfactory description. but the account which it gives of
park's death appears on the whole to be probable and consistent; and is
so far corroborated by other circumstances as to leave no reasonable
doubt with regard to the fact. [footnote: the genuine travelling journal
of a native african merchant may in some respects be considered as
interesting, simply from the circumstance of its singularity. but it
must be acknowledged that for the mere purpose of gratifying curiosity
very few specimens of isaaco would have been sufficient. the sole reason
for publishing such a document at full length, is the circumstance of
its containing the only direct evidence of park's death. in every other
point of view it is wholly destitute of interest, and cannot even be
read through, without a strong effort; being inconceivably tedious, and
having all the dry minuteness of a log book, without its valuable
precision. there is great confusion as to places and times; and it is
possible only in a very few cases, to identify the former by reference
to the names of places given by park. incidents the most trifling are
related exactly in the same tone and manner as those of the greatest
importance. the account of park's death is given with more details, and
the story is not ill told. but some of the facts are very questionable;
and the circumstance of park and lieutenant martyn leaping hand in hand
with the soldiers into the river, is much too _theatrical_ to be
literally true.--what is most incredible, is the description of the
place where the event happened, which is stated to be an opening in a
rock "in the form of a door," forming the only passage for the water; a
fact so strange, that (if it were worth while to conjecture) one might
suspect an error in the translation.]

it is true that the proof of park's death according to this journal,
depends entirely upon the statement of amadi fatouma; but the nature of
the case admits of no other direct evidence; and some regard must be had
to the opinion of isaaco, considered by colonel maxwell as a person
entitled to a certain degree of credit, who, after full investigation,
was satisfied as to the truth of amadi's account. it may be observed
also, as a circumstance which gives additional weight to isaaco's
judgment, that being well acquainted with the anxiety of his employers
respecting park's safety, he must naturally have been desirous of
discovering reasons for believing that he was still in existence; and
was therefore unlikely to admit the fact of his death upon any ground,
short of his own positive conviction.

but the principal and decisive circumstance in this case, is the length
of time which has elapsed without any intelligence being heard of park,
since his departure from sansanding in november 1805. this can only be
accounted for, by supposing either that he is actually dead or detained
in africa as a captive; and when we consider the nature of the
enterprise in which he was engaged, his personal character, and the
resistance he was likely to make in case of any hostile attack, we must
acknowledge that of the two suppositions, the former is by far the most
probable.

to this it may be added, that since the time of the original reports
respecting park's death in 1806, no circumstance has occurred to bring
that fact into doubt; if we except a few transient rumours relative to
_white men_ stated to be in remote parts of the interior of africa,
which have led some persons to suppose that park may be still in
existence. several surmises of this kind (for they are entitled to no
higher appellation) have from time to time been circulated, and have
found their way into newspapers and public journals; although the
slightest enquiry would have shewn that they were entitled to no credit
or attention. they would commonly be found to originate from loose and
indistinct communications received from some of the settlements on the
african coast, to which very slight and insignificant circumstances
might originally have given occasion. a moor or an asiatic, the colour
of whose skin differs by a few shades from that of the native africans,
would be described by them as a stranger or white man. the _hearsay_
accounts of the appearance of such a person in the interior of africa
would afford ample materials for credulity and exaggeration; and might
easily give rise to reports and assertions the most unfounded and
extravagant.

upon the whole there seems to be no reasonable ground of doubt with
regard to the fact either of park's death or of its having happened in
the manner described in isaaco's journal. the first of these may be
considered as morally certain, the latter as highly probable. but the
exact time when this event took place and the circumstances attending
it, are left in great obscurity; partly from a general want of
distinctness and precision in the narrative; but principally because the
particulars related, depend altogether upon the unsupported testimony of
a slave, (represented as the only survivor of those who were with park
at the time of his death,) from whom the information was obtained at an
interval of three months after the transaction. it is obvious that no
reliance can be placed on a narrative resting upon such authority; and
we must be content to remain in ignorance of the precise circumstances
of park's melancholy fate. but that he was attacked by the natives on
his voyage from sansanding eastwards, that he was overpowered by
numbers, and that he perished on his passage down the niger, cannot
reasonably be doubted.

       *       *       *       *       *

the leading parts of mungo park's character must have been anticipated
by the reader in the principal events and transactions of his life. of
his enterprising spirit, his indefatigable vigilance and activity, his
calm fortitude and unshaken perseverance, he has left permanent
memorials in the narrative of his former travels and in the journal and
correspondence now published. in these respects few travellers have
equalled, none certainly ever surpassed him. nor were the qualities of
his understanding less valuable or conspicuous. he was distinguished by
a correctness of judgment, seldom found united with an ardent and
adventurous turn of mind, and generally deemed incompatible with it. his
talents certainly were not brilliant, but solid and useful, such as were
peculiarly suited to a traveller and geographical discoverer. hence, in
his accounts of new and unknown countries, he is consistent and
rational; he is betrayed into no exaggeration, nor does he exhibit any
traces of credulity or enthusiasm. his attention was directed
exclusively to facts; and except in his opinion relative to the
termination of the niger (which he supported by very plausible
arguments) he rarely indulged in conjecture, much less in hypothesis or
speculation.

among the characteristic qualities of park which were so apparent in his
former travels, none certainly were more valuable or contributed more to
his success than his admirable prudence, calmness and temper; but it has
been doubted whether these merits were equally conspicuous during his
second expedition. the parts of his conduct which have given occasion to
this remark, are, his setting out from the gambia almost at the eve of
the rainy season, and his voyage down the niger under circumstances so
apparently desperate. on the motives by which he may have been
influenced as to the former of these measures, something has been said
in the course of the foregoing narrative. [footnote: see p. lxvi.] with
regard to his determination in the latter instance, justice must allow
that his situation was one of extreme difficulty, and admitted probably
of no alternative. in both cases our knowledge of the facts is much too
imperfect to enable us to form a correct opinion as to the propriety of
his conduct, much less to justify us in condemning him _unheard_.

in all the relations of private life, he appears to have been highly
exemplary; and his conduct as a son, a husband, and a father merited
every praise. to the more gentle and amiable parts of his character the
most certain of all testimonies may be found in the warm attachment of
his friends, and in the fond and affectionate recollections of every
branch of his family.

there are some moral defects very difficult to be avoided by those
persons, who from a situation comparatively obscure, rise to sudden
distinction and celebrity. from these failings park was happily exempt.
he was a stranger to all vanity and affectation; and notwithstanding his
great popularity and success, appears to have lost no portion of the
genuine simplicity of his character and manners. this simplicity
originated perhaps in a considerable degree from a certain coldness and
reserve, which, as was before remarked, rendered him very indifferent,
and perhaps somewhat averse, to mixed or general society. it was
probably owing to the same cause that his conversation, for a man who
had seen so much, had nothing remarkable, and was rarely striking or
animated. hence, although his appearance was interesting and
prepossessing, he was apt to disappoint the expectations of strangers;
and those persons who estimated his general talents from his powers of
conversation, formed an erroneous and inadequate opinion of his merits.

in his person he was tall, being about six feet high, and perfectly well
proportioned. his countenance and whole appearance were highly
interesting; and his frame active and robust, fitted for great exertions
and the endurance of great hardships. his constitution had suffered
considerably from the effects of his first journey into africa, but
seems afterwards to have been restored to its original vigour, of which
his last expedition afforded the most ample proofs.

park's family consisted of three sons and one daughter, all of whom,
together with mrs. park their mother, are now living. he also left a
mother, four brothers (of whom one is lately dead), and three sisters.

       *       *       *       *       *

in the death of mungo park we have to lament not only the loss of the
most distinguished traveller of modern times, but the failure of an
expedition, honourable to great britain and highly interesting to
humanity and science. for a time this unfortunate event has had the
effect of damping the ardour of geographical enquiry, and of
discouraging all ideas of farther endeavours to explore the interior of
africa. but we may hope that the publication of park's journal will
revive the attention of enlightened men to this subject; and that the
prospect of future discoveries in that quarter of the globe will not be
hastily abandoned.

it has been seen that park's failure was entirely owing to the improper
season at which his journey was undertaken, and that this circumstance
was occasioned by a series of unforeseen delays arising from a great
variety of causes. a slight difference in some of those accidents which
retarded his progress to the niger, might obviously have had a most
material influence on the ultimate success of the expedition. thus, for
example, if he could have sailed for africa immediately after receiving
his official instructions, if his passage had been quicker, if fewer
causes of delay had occurred on the coast and afterwards during the
journey, and finally, if the rainy season, which is subject to some
slight variations, had commenced a little later;--he might perhaps have
been able to reach the banks of the niger in good order, and with a loss
comparatively small; and in that case might have proceeded on his
journey eastwards at the conclusion of the rainy season with some
prospect of success. but the safe arrival of park's expedition at the
niger, which was only just possible in the actual circumstances of the
case, would have been morally certain provided he had sailed from
england (as he ought to have done) before the month of october, and had
been ready to take his departure from the gambia towards the interior at
the end of november; from which time there is always an uninterrupted
continuance of fine and healthy weather during a period of five months.

hence we may safely conclude that, supposing all reasonable precautions
to be taken, an expedition similar to that of park, may penetrate to the
niger and along the banks of that river as far as the eastern frontier
of bambarra, in good order and with very little loss; and this most
important fact is justly considered by park himself as being fully
established by his own disastrous expedition. [footnote: journal, p.
140.]

in what degree it is practicable to penetrate _beyond bambarra_ yet
remains to be ascertained; since it cannot be said that this question is
determined, or even materially affected, by what took place in park's
expedition. no general inference upon this subject can be fairly deduced
from an extreme case, such as park's evidently was; nor does it follow,
because a small party consisting of four europeans and a few negroes,
was attacked and overpowered, that an expedition well appointed and
properly organized, would experience a similar fate. it may be observed
also that, ill provided as park was with the means of defence, he was
able to proceed in safety beyond tombuctoo, where the moors are most
numerous, and would in a short time have reached a country beyond the
moorish territory, where the danger would probably have been much
diminished. [footnote: see letter to sir joseph banks (ante p. lxxviii)
in which park says "that, according to the information of the guide,
they should touch on the moors no where but at tombuctoo."] neither is
it altogether certain that his death was not one of those _accidents_,
to which such enterprises are peculiarly liable, but from which no
general conclusion can be drawn. [footnote: such, for example, as
captain cooke's death, which certainly affords no argument against
voyages of discovery. it may be observed that the statement in the note
annexed to amadi fatouma's journal (see p. 213) gives some countenance
to the supposition mentioned in the text. from this note it appears that
certain presents which amadi had delivered from park to one of the
chiefs of haoussa for the use of the king, were with-held from the
latter in consequence of the chief's being informed that park would not
return; and that the king's resentment, occasioned by his receiving no
presents, was the cause of park's death.--it may be proper on this
occasion to apprize the reader that the notes to isaaco's journal
(except in one instance, p. 181) are all of them printed from the
manuscript of the translation, and appear to be parts of the original
document transmitted from africa. they seem to have been inserted by the
translator; and in several cases, apparently, were added from
information which he received from isaaco.]

it will appear, upon a due consideration of these circumstances, that
reasonable and sufficient inducements still exist for attempting farther
discoveries in africa; and that nothing really unfavourable to such
undertakings can with propriety be inferred from park's late failure;
but on the contrary, that the events of that mission furnish additional
grounds of encouragement and new prospects of success. the proper _mode_
also of conducting such discoveries in future, may now be considered as
ascertained. before park's late journey, the important question whether
an expedition of this kind should be accompanied by a military escort,
was involved in some difficulty. apprehensions might then be entertained
lest the appearance of an armed force passing through the country might
alarm the jealousy of the natives, and produce hostile combinations, by
which any small body of european troops would sooner or later be
overpowered. it might also have been doubted, and with great appearance
of reason, whether it would be practicable on such a march to obtain
proper supplies of provisions. the history of park's expedition appears
to furnish a clear and satisfactory solution of both these difficulties;
and experience having shewn that large tracts of the african continent
may be traversed in safety by the aid even of a small and ill organized
force under circumstances the most unfavourable, the question as to the
expediency of a military escort may now be said to be determined.

the sufferings of park during his former journey, and the melancholy
fate of major houghton, mr. horneman, and other travellers distinguished
by their enterprise and ability, demonstrate the utter hopelessness of
such undertakings, when attempted by solitary and unprotected
individuals. even if the two schemes of discovery were equally
practicable, the military plan (supposing always that the force employed
is strictly limited to the purposes of security and protection) would on
several accounts be entitled to a decided preference; inasmuch as it
affords more ample means of observation and enquiry, as it is calculated
to inspire the africans with a greater respect for the european
character, and as it may be rendered far more efficacious for the
purposes of friendly and commercial intercourse. [footnote: if the
practice of sending out single individuals on journies of discovery into
africa is still to be continued, it would be better perhaps to employ
_mahometan_ travellers, who might accompany some of the great caravans.
the dangers, to which european adventurers are always exposed, from the
ferocity and intolerance of the moors, would thus in a considerable
degree be avoided. there is reason to believe that individuals
sufficiently intelligent for an expedition of this kind, and whose
constitutions would also be well suited to the climate of africa, might
be found without much difficulty among the mahometan inhabitants of
hindostan. if a fair judgment can be formed of this class of the british
subjects from the _travels of abu taleb_ (the genuine and highly
interesting production of a native mahometan of the east indies), a very
favourable opinion must be entertained of their intelligence and general
information.]

the scheme of an expedition into the interior of africa, formed upon
these principles, has lately been proposed from high authority, which
holds out a considerable prospect of success. from the quarter in which
the suggestion has originated, a reasonable hope may be entertained that
this plan, of which the following is a short outline, will ultimately be
carried into effect. [footnote: the particulars of the projected
expedition here alluded to, which are given in the text, are extracted
from a very interesting communication lately made to the african
institution by major general gordon, quarter master general of the
british forces.]

in the royal african corps now serving at sierra leone there are three
companies of black men, enlisted from the slaves obtained from the
numerous slave trading vessels which have at different times been
condemned as prize upon that coast. among these there are several
natives of tombuctoo, haoussa, bornou and other countries even more
distant; some of them having been brought from parts of africa so remote
as to have been _two, three_ and _four_ moons upon their journey to the
coast. most of them have acquired sufficient knowledge of the english
language to express themselves so as to be understood, although they
retain their native languages, which they still speak with fluency.

these men, having been trained and disciplined with great care, are
become excellent soldiers, and are spoken of by the governor of sierra
leone in the highest terms of approbation for their obedience,
steadiness and general good conduct. they are of course inured to the
climate, are accustomed to hardships and fatigues, and capable of the
greatest exertions. they are at the same time courageous and high
spirited, feeling a pride and elevation from the advantages which they
enjoy, and the comparative _rank_ to which they have attained; and they
are warmly attached to the british government.

it is proposed that a proper and well selected detachment of these
troops should form the basis of the intended expedition; and that,
besides the person having the immediate command, one or two other
leading persons should be appointed, each properly qualified to assist
in the direction and management of the principal concerns, and (in case
of emergency) to undertake the sole charge of the expedition. the number
of the troops employed would of course be regulated by a due regard to
the probable means of subsistence; but it is proposed that they should
be sufficiently numerous to enable the leaders, in cases where it might
be expedient, to separate with small detachments, taking distinct lines
of march as local circumstances and other occasions might require.
[footnote: the writer is well aware that, in some of the opinions which
he has expressed with regard to the black troops of sierra leone, he can
hardly expect the concurrence of several excellent individuals, among
the best friends of the african cause, who are known to be averse to the
employment of negroes in the military service; and he is ready to admit
that the practice which has prevailed of enlisting captured africans is
liable to some abuse. let such abuses be anxiously guarded against by
all the means which legislative wisdom can devise; let every charge of
misconduct in this respect be rigorously investigated; and if it should
appear to be well founded, let it be pursued with the utmost strictness
and severity. but let not occasional abuses be urged as valid arguments
against the practice itself, if it should be ascertained to be, on the
whole, beneficial to the africans. it has been stated by enlightened and
benevolent persons, who have witnessed the state of slavery in the west
indies (and the assertion has every appearance of probability) that the
embodying and employment of black troops has had the happiest effect in
elevating and improving the negro character, and in giving a greater
degree of importance to that oppressed race. in the instance of sierra
leone, to which these observations more immediately relate, compare the
situation of a captured negro, when rescued from the horrors of a slave
vessel with that of the same man a short time afterwards, when serving
as a british soldier! the ordinary condition of human life has nothing
similar to this change; it is a transition from the most abject misery
to ease, comfort, and comparative dignity.--add to this, the extreme
difficulty (which every unprejudiced enquirer must admit) attending the
management and disposal of great numbers of these captured negroes in a
small colony like sierra leone; and the utter impossibility, considering
their savage ignorance and total want of habits of industry, of
providing all of them, or even any tolerable number, with agricultural
establishments.]

the principal objects of this expedition would be similar in all
respects to those of park's last journey--to ascertain the course and
termination of the niger, to acquire a geographical knowledge of the
countries through which it flows; and to procure all possible
information relative to the condition of the inhabitants, their
commercial relations and their general state of improvement. with a view
to the attainment of these objects of practical and scientific enquiry,
the leader of the expedition would be enjoined in the most strict and
positive terms by his official instructions, to avoid all acts of
aggression towards the natives, and (except in cases of absolute
self-defence) to abstain from every species of violence. he would be
farther directed to use his utmost endeavours to establish a friendly
intercourse and communication with the inhabitants; and for this purpose
to employ the most intelligent of the black troops, in all cases in
which it might be practicable, as interpreters of the expedition and
messengers of peace and conciliation.

by the plan which has thus shortly been described, every disadvantage
which attended park's mission, would be avoided, and all its defects
supplied; and there seems to be every reasonable assurance that an
expedition, formed and conducted upon such principles (with a due
attention to the proper season for travelling), would be attended with
ultimate success.

it would be difficult to anticipate the full extent of those beneficial
consequences which may ultimately be expected from the successful result
of such an expedition. we may perhaps be justified in expecting that the
intercourse, thus formed with the interior of africa, will eventually
open new communications of trade, and possibly create new markets; that
a certain portion of that vast commerce, which is now carried on with
tombuctoo from morocco and the shores of the mediterranean, may be
diverted to the western coast; and that great quantities of european
goods, now conveyed through other channels, may be transported into the
centre of africa through the new route of the niger.

but without speculating too confidently upon commercial revolutions of
the nature here alluded to, which are for the most part very slow and
gradual, and seldom effected without much difficulty; we may safely
conclude that any rational and well concerted expedition to the interior
of africa must be of great efficacy in promoting and extending the
legitimate and beneficial commerce with different parts of that vast
continent, which has been rapidly advancing since the abolition of the
slave trade. [footnote: see appendix, no. vi.] we may also reasonably
expect that such enterprises, judiciously conducted, will have important
effects upon the civilization and general improvement of africa, by
exciting industry and diffusing useful knowledge among the natives; and
that some portion of these advantages may, in due time, be extended to
those remote and sequestered countries, which are at present excluded
from all intercourse with europe, and abandoned to hopeless ignorance
and barbarism. let us hope that the honour of passing those barriers,
which have hitherto separated africa from the civilized world, is
reserved for the courage and perseverance of that nation, by whose
enlightened and disinterested exertions so much has been effected in
modern times, for the advancement of geographical knowledge. the voyages
of discovery which have been undertaken by the command of his present
majesty, unstained by the guilt of conquest, and directed exclusively
towards objects of humanity and science, have conferred a lasting
distinction on the british name and character. the attempt to explore
the interior of africa, dictated by the same generous views, is in no
respect less interesting, nor does it promise less important results,
even than those great undertakings; and it will be peculiarly worthy of
an age and nation, rendered for ever memorable in the annals of mankind
by the abolition of the african slave trade.

       *       *       *       *       *

appendix.

       *       *       *       *       *

appendix. no. i.


page viii.

there is no part of europe, in which education has been a subject of
more general attention or produced more important effects than in
scotland. during little more than a century, a system of public
instruction established in that country, has not only had the most
beneficial influence upon industry and private morals, but has been the
principal cause of one of the most remarkable changes of national
character that has ever yet taken place during so short a period. at a
time when the public attention in this country is so laudably directed
towards providing means of instruction for the poor, a few remarks on
the effects of a system of general education in scotland may not be
thought unseasonable. the following facts and observations relative to
this important subject are principally extracted from the interesting
life of burns, the poet, written by the late amiable and excellent
doctor currie.

the system of education in scotland, though closely connected with its
ecclesiastical establishment, owes its first legal existence to a
statute passed in the year 1646 by the parliament of that kingdom for
establishing schools in every parish, at the expense of the landholders,
for the express purpose of teaching the poor. on the restoration in 1660
this excellent statute was repealed; and nothing further was done or
attempted for the instruction of the people during the reigns of charles
and james, which were chiefly occupied in religious persecution. but in
the year 1696, some years after the revolution, the statute of 1646 was
re-enacted nearly in the same terms, and continues to be the law of
scotland at the present time. connected with this legislative provision
are many acts passed by the general assemblies of the church of
scotland, which are binding as to matters of ecclesiastical
jurisdiction; and the whole together forms a code of regulations, which
is eminently distinguished for the reasonableness and practical good
sense of its particular provisions, and which experience has shewn to be
perfectly effectual for the important purpose intended. so much
convinced indeed are the lower classes in scotland of the benefits
attending this system, that, where the parishes are large, they often
form subscriptions and establish private schools of their own, in
addition to the parochial seminaries.

in the year 1698, about the time when this system was established,
fletcher of saltoun, in one of his _discourses concerning the affairs of
scotland_, describes the lower classes of that kingdom as being in a
state of the most abject poverty and savage ignorance; and subsisting
partly by mere beggary, but chiefly by violence and rapine, "without any
regard or subjection either to the laws of the land or to those of god
and nature." some of the instances given by this writer of the disorder
and violence of that period may remind us of the effects produced by a
similar state of things during our own times, upon the _irish peasantry_
in the disturbed parts of that unhappy country. "in years of plenty,"
says fletcher, "many thousands of them meet together in the mountains,
where they feast and riot for many days, and at country weddings,
markets, _burials_, and other public occasions, they are to be seen,
both men and women, perpetually drunk, cursing, blaspheming, and
fighting together." [footnote: political works of andrew fletcher, 8vo:
london 1737, p. 144.] such was the state of scotland at the time when
the present system of education was established.

it is justly stated by dr. currie that, at the present day, there is
perhaps no country in europe, in which, in proportion to its population,
so small a number of crimes fall under the chastisement of the criminal
law, as in scotland; and he adds, upon undoubted authority, that on an
average of thirty years preceding the year, 1797, the executions in that
division of the island did not amount to six annually, and that more
felons have been convicted and sentenced to transportation at one
quarter sessions for the town of manchester only, than the average
number of persons sentenced to a similar punishment during a whole year
by all the judges of scotland. [footnote: works of robert burns,
liverpool 1800. vol. 1. p. 353, 8vo.]

but the influence of education in scotland has not been merely negative
or confined to the diminution of criminal offences; it has produced in a
very eminent degree those habits of industry and frugality, upon which
all civilization and improvement ultimately depend. in no age or country
have these excellent qualities, the cardinal virtues of the lower orders
of society, been more prevalent than among the peasantry and common
people of scotland during modern times: in none have the instances been
more frequent of individuals who, by a course of meritorious exertions,
have raised themselves from an inferior condition of life to ease and
competence, and sometimes to riches and distinction.

it is impossible to conceive any situation more happy and respectable
than that of the parent of a well educated family (such as was the
father of the subject of this memoir, and such as there are now many
others among the farmers and peasantry of scotland) enjoying the just
reward of his paternal cares in the prosperity and success of his
children; each of whom he sees engaged in some beneficial pursuit, each
bettering his condition in life, and each advanced somewhat in the scale
of society above the situation in which he was born. it is this visible
_progress_ and continual _improvement_ in the circumstances and
condition of families, so frequent in the class here particularly
alluded to, which produces the greatest portion of happiness of which
any community is capable; which stimulates to intelligent activity, and
useful, persevering exertions; and which keeps alive and invigorates
that orderly, quiet ambition, which is the foundation of all private and
public prosperity, and the great civilizing principle of individuals and
nations.

it is true that there are several other circumstances, besides the
system of public education in scotland, which have assisted in producing
that extraordinary change of national character which has given occasion
to the present remarks. but of the various causes which have contributed
to this change, education is by far the most important, and that,
without which indeed all the rest would have been comparatively of no
avail. it is to early instruction, most unquestionably, that we must
attribute that general intelligence, and those habits of thoughtfulness,
deliberation, and foresight, which usually distinguish the common people
of scotland, where-ever they may be found, and whatever may be their
employments and situations; which ensure their success in life under
favourable circumstances; and in adverse fortune serve as a protection
against absolute indigence, and secure to them a certain station above
the lowest condition of life.

the truth of this remark will be apparent from a few practical
instances, drawn from the experience of common life, of that general
superiority which is here attributed to the lower classes of the scotch,
as the effect of their superior industry and intelligence--1. every one
has remarked the great number of professional gardeners from that
country, many of whom have been common labourers, and who if they had
been no better educated than most english labourers, must always have
remained in that situation. of this numerous class mr. dickson, park's
brother-in law, is a remarkable and most distinguished example.--2.
scotland supplies a considerable number of stewards, confidential
clerks, book-keepers, &c. from a class of society, which in most other
countries furnishes only domestic servants. the british colonies, and
especially the west indies, are chiefly provided with clerks, overseers
of plantations, &c. from this source.--3. the prodigious number of
non-commissioned officers in the army, who are natives of scotland,
having been raised from the ranks in consequence of their knowledge of
reading and writing, and general good conduct, is also very
remarkable.--the recollection of most readers will probably supply them
with other examples; but there are two instances, somewhat out of the
course of ordinary experience, which deserve to be particularly
mentioned.

in the year 1803, mr. matthew martin, a gentleman distinguished for his
active benevolence, having been for some time engaged, under the
sanction of government, in a laborious enquiry concerning the "state of
mendicity in the metropolis," was desired to make a report upon that
subject for the information of government. from the statement which mr.
martin prepared on that occasion and laid before the secretary of state,
it appeared that the number of scotch beggars in london was remarkably
small, especially in proportion to the irish beggars, with whom it was
most natural to compare them. of 2000 beggars, whose cases were
investigated by mr. martin, the following is a summary.

belonging to parishes home     570
             distant parishes  336
irish                          679
scotch                          65
foreign                         30

the second of the two cases is of a still more uncommon nature.--in the
course of the expedition against egypt in 1807, the advanced guard of
major general fraser's army having taken possession of rosetta and
occupied a position at el hamed a few miles from that town, was
surprised by a strong corps of turkish troops, and after an obstinate
conflict and the loss of many lives, compelled to surrender. according
to the turkish custom, the prisoners taken were sold as slaves, and
dispersed over the whole country; some of them being sent as far as
upper egypt. great exertions were naturally made by the british
government to redeem those unfortunate persons from captivity; and this
was happily effected as to all the prisoners, except a few who could not
be traced, by the assistance of signor petrucci, the swedish consul at
alexandria.

from the authentic documents relating to this transaction, it appears
that the ransoms paid for the redemption of the captives differed very
considerably; the prices varying from between twenty and thirty pounds
to more than one hundred pounds sterling for each man. but it is
observable, on comparing the different rates, that the highest ransoms
were paid for those, who must be considered, from their names, to have
been natives of scotland; and who, it may be presumed, were more
_valuable_ than the rest from being more orderly and intelligent. it
could not have been easily anticipated that a soldier, brought up in a
scotch parish school, was likely, when enslaved by the turks and a
captive in egypt, to derive much advantage from his _education_. yet it
is probable from this circumstance that the intelligence and habits of
good conduct, which he acquired from early instruction, might recommend
him to his master, and as domestic slavery admits of many mitigations,
might procure him kinder and better treatment.



appendix. no. ii.


page xix.

major rennell, in his geographical illustrations of park's travels, has
done ample justice to the knowledge and judgment, so eminently displayed
by d'anville in the investigation of several important points relative
to the geography of north africa, which have been elucidated by this
writer from very imperfect materials with extraordinary sagacity and
success. in the 26th volume of the memoirs of the academy of
inscriptions, there are two very important dissertations by this
distinguished geographer; the first, on the sources of the nile; and the
second, concerning the rivers of the interior of africa, with reference
to the opinions of the ancient and modern writers who have treated on
that subject. the latter is the most immediately connected with the
particular questions alluded to in the text; and it is remarkable that
the principal opinions, or rather conjectures, of d'anville (of which
the opinion relating to the course of the niger is the most important),
although deduced from very uncertain and discordant sources of
information, have been confirmed in a great degree by the discoveries of
modern travellers, especially by those of park. it appears that
d'anville was well acquainted with the existence of tombuctoo, and had
even ascertained the situation of that city, as well as the general
course of the niger with a considerable degree of precision. he had also
formed a plan for sending a person, properly qualified, on an expedition
from the french settlement of st. joseph on the river senegal, to
tombuctoo; but owing to some circumstance which he does not explain, the
scheme did not take effect. as the dissertation here alluded to may not
be in the hands of every reader, the passage relating to this subject
may be worth transcribing.--after mentioning ghana as the principal
mahometan city of nigritia, spoken of by edrisi, he says that many of
the fatimites, who escaped from the power of the califs, took refuge in
the interior of africa, where they formed various states. he then
proceeds as follows:

"tombut ou tombouctou, est actuellement entre les villes de la nigritie,
celle dont on parle davantage. on ne doit point etre surpris qu'edrisi
n'en fasse pas mention. outre qu'elle se peut juger hors des limites de
ce qui lui a ete connu, leon d'afrique nous apprend que la fondation de
tombut par un prince de barbarie, appelle mensa-suleiman, est de l'an
610 de l'hegire, qui repond a l'an 1213 de l'ere chretienne, ce qui est
posterieur a la geographie d'edrisi, composee vers le milieu du douzieme
siecle. la situation de cette ville n'est pas precisement sur le niger;
mais elle y a son port, nomme cabra, a quelques milles de distance.
comme aucune des nations commercantes de l'europe n'a penetre aussi
avant dans les terres, en cette partie d'afrique, que la nation
francoise, par ses etablissemens sur le senega, elle est plus a portee
qu'une autre d'acquerir quelque connoissance de cet interieur. j'ai
appris, d'une personne qui avoit commande plusieurs annees au fort
saint-joseph en galam, lequel se peut estimer distant en droite ligne de
l'entree du senega d'environ cent trent lieues francoises; que les
bambaras, qui du fond du pays amenent des esclaves noirs, comptent
quarante huit journees depuis tombut jusqu'au fort saint-joseph, et que
la mesure commune de la journee s'evalue a environ cinq lieues, d'ou il
resulte autour de deux cens quarante lieues. le moyen d'en savoir
davantage seroit, que quelque personne habituee au climat, comme il y en
a dans le haut du senega, accompagnee d'interpretes, et qu'une
instruction prealable auroit mise au fait d'une partie des choses dont
il seroit a propos de s'informer, fit le voyage de tombut. un evenement
a empeche l'execution d'un projet, auquel j'avois tres-volontiers pris
part dans cette vue."

_mem. de l'acad. des inscriptions_, tom. xxvi. p. 72.

the above passage was written by d'anville about the year 1754; and it
is not a little extraordinary that during the sixty years that have
since elapsed, a period so much distinguished for geographical
discovery, tombuctoo should never have been visited by any european
traveller: and that one of the greatest marts of african commerce, which
is annually resorted to by caravans from various parts of that
continent, should remain at this time entirely unknown to the civilized
world.

in speaking of tombuctoo as being still entirely unknown, the writer is
aware that a particular description of that city has been given in an
_account of the empire of morocco_ published in the year 1809 by mr.
james grey jackson, who resided in that part of africa during many
years. but mr. jackson derived his whole knowledge of tombuctoo from the
accounts of native traders; upon whose unsupported testimony very little
reliance can be placed; especially as to matters of detail, or such
facts as require to be stated with any degree of exactness. considering
that mr. jackson's information was obtained from this source, the very
minuteness and apparent precision of his account, are circumstances
highly unfavourable to its authenticity.

with reference to the internal geography of africa, the writer may take
this opportunity of observing, that next to the african association, to
whom we are indebted for almost all the authentic information which we
possess upon this subject, [footnote: the valuable discoveries of the
late mr. browne (whose death must be lamented as a public loss) form an
exception to this general remark; but perhaps the only exception.]
considerable praise is due to the sierra leone company; under whose
auspices, during the time they were in possession of that colony,
several important journies into the interior were judiciously undertaken
and successfully executed. among these may be mentioned an expedition in
1794 by mr. watt and mr. winterbottom (being a land journey of near five
hundred miles, in going and returning by different routes) to laby and
teembo, both of them considerable towns, and the latter the capital of
the foulah country. tombuctoo appeared, from the enquiries made by the
travellers, to be well known at both those places; and the communication
with that city from laby, though it was spoken of as a journey of four
moons, was represented to be open, and they were furnished with many
particulars of the route. shortly afterwards, in consequence perhaps of
this information, a project was formed at sierra leone of sending out a
mission to tombuctoo; but mr. watt, who was to have undertaken the
journey, died; and the invasion of the colony by the french in september
1794, together with the destruction which followed, seems to have put a
stop to expeditions of this nature.

the editor has been favoured by mr. macaulay, late secretary of the
sierra leone company and formerly governor of the colony, with a sight
of the journals of the expedition to teembo as well as of some other
missions from sierra leone of inferior importance. they do great credit
to the writers (especially the journal to teembo) and contain many
valuable and interesting particulars; several of which have been given
to the public in the reports of the sierra leone company, and in dr.
winterbottom's judicious account of the native africans in the
neighbourhood of that colony. but there is still room for a compilation
or selection from these journals, which, if well executed, would be an
instructive and interesting publication.


appendix. no. iii.


page xxix.

soon after mr. edwards's death several letters passed between park and
sir william young, now governor of tobago, upon a subject immediately
connected with the question, considered in the memoir, relative to the
assistance afforded by mr. edwards in preparing park's travels for the
press. copies of these letters having been transmitted to the editor by
park's family, he thinks it right on the present occasion to lay them
before the public; remarking at the same time that, after due
consideration of their contents, he continues to be of the opinion which
he has expressed in the text.

the occasion of this correspondence appears to have been as follows. mr.
edwards was engaged, at the time of his death, in preparing for the
press an enlarged and corrected edition of his _history of the west
indies_; but as he did not live to complete it, his friend sir william
young superintended the publication of the work, and added a short
preface; in which, speaking of mr. edwards's literary merits, he
mentioned "the judicious compilation and elegant recital of the travels
of mungo park". this produced a letter of expostulation from park to sir
william young, of which either no copy was kept, or it has been since
lost or mislaid; but the nature of its contents will be seen from the
sequel of the correspondence.


_sir william young to mr. park._

_59 harley-street, november 9th, 1803._

"the day before yesterday i received your letter dated so far back as
august 25th. it appears to have been put into the london post, addressed
to my clerk's lodgings, only last week, and reached me in the country
november the 7th. i am thus particular as to dates, as i could not bear
the imputation of having so long neglected the due acknowledgment of a
letter from one whom i so highly esteem and respect. in regard to the
question you state, i understood from the late mr. edwards, that he
assisted in the general arrangement of the materials you supplied, as
dr. hawkesworth did, in the case of a voyage by the great navigator
captain cooke; and that the previous account or summary of your travels
delivered into the african association was written by him; to which your
fuller account of your travels in detail was subsequent. the word
"author," i believe, does not occur in the passage you refer to; and if
the words "compilation and recital" seem to bear any application beyond
the prospectus before adverted to, or in any way to trench on your just
pretensions as a writer, i truly lament the inaccuracy, and will take
the most immediate means of rectifying the error, which circumstances
may place within my reach; either by present correction or on a new
edition of the work. my situation as secretary of the african
association furnishes me with documents from which i have learned so
highly to appreciate your character and to entertain so grateful a sense
of your public services, that it would be painful in me, in the smallest
degree to have stated any thing that might be so construed as to affect
your just literary pretensions; although it is difficult to add to the
just and high reputation you held independently, from the fortitude,
discretion, and resource so eminently shewn in your distinguished and
successful enterprise."


_mr. park to sir william young._

_fowlshiels, 14th may, 1804._

"i perceive by your letter, that you meant the words 'compilation' and
'recital,' to refer entirely to the abridgment of my travels, which was
written for the perusal of the gentlemen of the african association, by
mr. edwards, their secretary.

"a printed copy of this abridgment was delivered to each of the
gentlemen at their annual meeting, but i believe it was never publicly
sold. the greater number of readers are therefore but slightly
acquainted with it; and to such, the words above-mentioned will naturally
convey a very different meaning. having thus explained myself to you, i
hope you will see the propriety of correcting the passage
above-mentioned as soon as possible. i must therefore request you will
permit me to insert your letter in any of the periodical publications,
or favour me with a correction of the passage, as you may think proper."


_extract from a letter of sir william young to mr. park_

_may 25, 1804._

"the letter which i wrote on the subject of the publication of your
travels in africa, is perfectly at your service to make any use of,
which you may think proper. no measure can be more satisfactory and
agreeable to myself, than that which may most fully render justice to
your high and well earned reputation in every point of view."




appendix. no. iv.


the question regarding the termination of the niger is one of the most
doubtful and obscure in modern geography, and in the present defective
state of our information with regard to the interior of africa, seems
hardly to admit of a clear and satisfactory solution. of the difficulties
with which the subject is attended, some judgment may be formed from the
various and even opposite opinions which have been maintained relative to
the course of the niger, since park's discoveries have ascertained that
it flows from west to east. as the enquiry is somewhat curious, a summary
view of these different opinions, and of the principal arguments by which
they are supported, may not be uninteresting to the readers of park's
life. to investigate the question with the accuracy and minuteness which
it deserves, would not only very far exceed the limits of a note, but
would require much more information upon this subject than the editor
possesses, united with some previous habits of geographical disquisition.

i. according to the oldest of these opinions, and that which is supported
by the greatest authorities (being the opinion not only of some of the
principal geographers of antiquity, but of d'anville and rennell among
the moderns), it is supposed, that the niger has an inland termination
somewhere in the eastern part of africa, probably in wangara or ghana:
and that it is partly discharged into inland lakes, which have no
communication with the sea, and partly spread over a wide extent of level
country, and lost in sands or evaporated by the heat of the sun.

[footnote: proceedings of the african association, vol. i. p. 535.]

the principal ground of this supposition is, the opinion of some of the
best informed writers of antiquity on the geography of africa, and a sort
of general persuasion prevalent among the ancients to the same effect;
circumstances, it must be acknowledged, of considerable weight in
determining this question: since there is good reason to believe, that
the knowledge of the ancients concerning the interior of africa was much
more extensive and accurate than that of the moderns. it is justly
observed by dr. robertson, that the geographical discoveries of the
ancients were made chiefly by land, those of the moderns by sea; the
progress of conquest having led to the former, that of commerce to the
latter. (hist. of america, vol. ii. p. 3l6, 8vo.) besides which, there
are several distinct and peculiar causes which have essentially
contributed to our present ignorance respecting the interior of africa;
namely, the great prevalence of the slave trade, which has confined the
attention of european adventurers exclusively to the coast; the small
temptation which the continent of africa held out, during the continuance
of that trade, to internal commerce; and the almost impenetrable barrier
raised up against europeans in modern times, by the savage intolerance of
the moors.

the ancient opinion, respecting the termination of the niger which has
just been alluded to, receives a certain degree of confirmation from the
best and most authentic accounts concerning that part of africa, in which
the niger is supposed to disappear. this is represented by various
concurrent testimonies to be a great tract of alluvial country, having
several permanent lakes, and being annually overflowed for three months
during the rainy season.

against the hypothesis of an inland termination of the niger, several
objections have been urged, which are well deserving of attention. they
are principally founded on a consideration of the vast magnitude which
the niger must have attained after a course of more than 1600
geographical miles, and the difficulty of conceiving so prodigious a
stream to be discharged into lakes, and evaporated even by an african
sun. to account for such a phenomenon, a great inland sea, bearing some
resemblance to the caspian or the aral, appears to be necessary. but,
besides that the existence of so vast a body of water without any outlet
into the ocean, is in itself an improbable circumstance, and not to be
lightly admitted; such a sea, if it really existed, could hardly have
remained a secret to the ancients, and entirely unknown at the present
day.

it may just be observed, that d'anville, following ptolemy and other
writers whom he considers as the best informed on the internal geography
of africa, is satisfied that there are _two_ considerable rivers,
the niger and the _gir_; both of which are said to terminate in the
same quarter of africa, and precisely in the same manner. the gir,
totally unknown at the present day, is familiarly mentioned by claudian,
who, however, it may be recollected, was a native of africa:--

                        '_gir_, ditissimus amnis
            'aethiopum, simili mentitus gurgite nilum.'
                                                       carm. 21. v. 252.

in some mss. it is _notissimus_ amnis; but the other reading is more
probable.

                                  'domitorque ferarum
        'girrhaeus, qui vasta colit sub rupibus antra,
        'qui ramos ebeni, qui dentes vellit eburnos.'
                                                       carm. 47. v. 20.

ii. the second opinion respecting the niger is, that it terminates in the
nile. in other words, this hypothesis identifies the niger with the great
western branch of the nile, called the _white river_, which
d'anville traces from a source very far ss.w. to its junction with the
nile near sennaar. he likewise accurately distinguishes this stream from
the eastern branch, which is much shorter and of inferior magnitude, and
which takes its rise in the mountains of abyssinia. this opinion is
maintained by mr. horneman, mr. grey jackson, and several other modern
travellers; and it is slightly sanctioned by strabo and pliny, who speak
of the sources of the nile as being reported by some to be in the farther
parts of mauritania. but it may be affirmed with great confidence, that
of all the hypotheses respecting the termination of the niger, that which
supposes it to be a branch of the nile, is the most unfounded, and the
least consistent with acknowledged facts. it is indeed rather a loose
popular conjecture, than an opinion deduced from probable reasoning;
since nothing appears to be alleged in its support, except the mere
circumstance of the course of the river being in a direction towards the
nile; and a few vague notions of some of the african natives with regard
to this subject, which are unworthy of the smallest attention.

mr. jackson, indeed, in his travels (p. 310), states it to be a fact
universally known among the rich african traders, that the niger and the
nile are one and the same river, by means of which there is a practicable
communication between tombuctoo and grand cairo. between these two cities
caravans are continually passing, and a large trade is carried on; but
mr. jackson observes, that the expense of land-carriage by means of
camels is more moderate than that by water, and that the journey also is
more agreeable! he gives an account of the voyage to cairo down the
niger, having actually been performed in the year 1780 by a party of
seventeen negroes, the particulars of which expedition, he says that he
received from 'a very intelligent man who has an establishment at
tombuctoo.' these negroes proceeded down the niger from jinnie, on a
commercial speculation, and reached cairo after a voyage of fourteen
months. they returned by the caravan, and arrived at jinnie, after an
absence of more than three years. some of the facts which they reported
are not a little extraordinary:--_viz_. that in several places they
found the nile so shallow, in consequence of channels cut for irrigating
the lands, that they could not proceed in their boat, and were obliged to
transport it some distance over-land; that they saw between tombuctoo and
cairo _twelve hundred_ cities and towns, adorned with mosques and
towers, &c. it is needless to comment upon such _hearsay_
statements, received from an african traveller or merchant more than
twenty years after the transaction is said to have happened; nor would
any allusion have been made to them in this place, if mr. jackson's book
had not been much commended by distinguished critics, and quoted as an
authority respecting the interior of africa by several geographical
writers.

[footnote: edinburgh review, vol. xiv. p. 306.]

the principal, and apparently decisive, objection against this supposed
junction of the niger and the nile, is grounded upon a comparison of the
great _difference of level_ between the beds of the two rivers. from
the authentic information we possess by means of mr. browne, respecting
the countries west of the nile, it is now clear, that if this junction
takes place at all, it must be in the upper part of the nile, before that
river has quitted the higher regions of africa, from whence it has still
1000 geographical miles to run before it reaches the sea, passing in its
way through several cataracts. but it is utterly incredible that the
niger, which, in order to reach this part of the nile, must have run at
the least 2300 miles, should not in so long a course have descended to a
level considerably lower than that which is here described. this
objection is urged with great force by major rennell, who justly
considers it as being entirely decisive of the question; but he has added
several other arguments, which those who take an interest in this
question, will do well to consult.

[footnote: proceedings of the african association, vol. i. p. 537; and
vol. ii. p. 268, 280.]

iii. the supposition, mentioned in the text (p. lxviii), that the niger
terminates in the river congo, or, as it is sometimes called, the zaire,
is entirely a recent conjecture, adopted by park in consequence of the
information and suggestions of mr. maxwell, an experienced african
trader, who appears from his letters to have been a man of observation
and intelligence. the principal arguments in support of the opinion are
shortly and clearly given in the memoir addressed by park to lord camden;
but the subject will receive additional elucidation from mr. maxwell's
own statement, and especially from his striking description of the river
congo, the vast magnitude of which is little known, and has not
sufficiently attracted the attention of geographical writers. the
following passage is extracted from a letter, dated prior's lynn, near
longtown, july 20, 1804, addressed by mr. maxwell to william keir, of
milnholm, esq., a friend of park, to whom the letter was communicated by
mr. maxwell's desire.

"before ever the niger came to be the topic of conversation, it struck
me, that the congo drew its source far to the northward, from the floods
commencing long before any rains take place south of the equator; since
it begins to swell perceptibly about the latter end of october, and no
heavy rains set in before december: and about the end of january the
river must be supposed at its highest. at no time, however, can the rains
to the southward of the line be compared with those in the bight of
guinea, where ships are obliged to have a house erected over them during
these months.

"but, whether the congo be the outlet of the niger or not, it certainly
offers the best opening for exploring the interior of africa of any
scheme that has ever yet been attempted; and the ease and safety with
which it might be conducted, needs no comment. however, if the niger
_has_ a sensible outlet, i have no doubt of its proving the congo,
knowing all the rivers between cape palmas and cape lopes to be
inadequate to the purpose; nor need the immense course of such a river
surprise us, when we know that the river st. lawrence, contemptible in
size when compared with the congo, encompasses the whole of north
america, issuing through a chain of lakes. but instead of seven or eight
lakes, the congo may be supposed to pass through seventeen or eighteen;
which will solve any difficulty as to the floods of the niger not
immediately affecting the congo. i believe that our information of the
niger losing itself in the desert rests wholly upon the authority of the
romans, a people whose pursuits never led them to trace the course of
rivers with a view to traffic or civilization. if we may credit the
accounts of travellers in crossing the deserts, we find that, where-ever
they get water for refreshment, there are invariably verdure and palm
trees; and these spots in the desert of lybia were termed by the ancients
oases, or islands. now, if such small springs could produce such
permanent effects, we may reasonably suppose, that the immense stream of
the niger increased to three times the size from where mr. park left it,
would long before this have made the desert as green as any water meadow
and found its way gradually to the ocean, or inundated the whole
country."

"i can with much truth say this of the river congo, that by comparing it
with other rivers, according to the best writers, it must rank as the
third or fourth in magnitude. considering the force of the current it
produces in the sea, carrying out floating islands sixty or seventy
leagues from the coast, the amazon or plata only can cope with it. many
traders, whom i met with at embomma, (a settlement on the banks of the
congo distant thirty leagues from its mouth,) had come one month's
journey down the river, which, reckoned at twenty miles each day (and
they count them by the moon, _gonda_), would make six hundred miles;
and they spoke of it as equally large where they came from, and that it
went by the name of _enzaddi_, as it does among all the natives upon
the coast. should the shallow water, as laid down opposite saenda,
detract from the assumed size of the congo, let it be remembered, that
the river there is spread out ten miles in width, the middle channel of
which has never been accurately sounded. it has long been my opinion that
leyland's or molyneux island at embomma (either of which might be
rendered as impregnable as gibraltar at a very small expense) would be a
choice station for establishing an extensive commerce with the interior
of africa. indeed, if the idea of the congo being the outlet of the niger
prove so upon trial, we may consider it as an opening designed by
providence for exploring those vast regions, and civilizing the rude
inhabitants."

[footnote: a chart of the congo by mr. maxwell was published many years
since by laurie and whittle, fleet street.]

besides this account given by mr. maxwell, there are other testimonies to
the magnitude of the congo, shewing it to be a river of the first class,
and larger probably than the nile. in a journal (which the editor has
seen) of an intelligent and respectable naval officer, captain scobell,
who visited the coast of africa in the year 1813, in h.m. sloop of war
the thais, the congo is described as "an immense river from which issues
a continued stream at the rate of four or five knots in the dry, and six
or seven in the rainy season." in a subsequent passage he says, "in
crossing this stream, i met several floating islands, or broken masses
from the banks of that noble river, which, with the trees still erect,
and the whole wafting to the motion of the sea, rushed far into the
ocean, and formed a novel prospect even to persons accustomed to the
phenomena of the waters." he adds, that there are soundings to the
distance of from thirty or forty miles from the coast, arising probably
from the vast quantity of alluvial matter brought down by the force of
the stream.

other accounts state, that the waters of the congo may be distinguished
at sea more than thirty leagues from the coast, and that the water is
fresh at the distance of thirty miles.

[footnote: lopez, merulla, and dapper, referred to in phillips's voyages,
vol. iii. p. 236.]

these, perhaps, are exaggerations; but they may be received, in
confirmation of the preceding testimonies, as sufficient proofs of a
general opinion among navigators with regard to the size and force of
this prodigious river. it is mentioned by major rennell in his very
interesting account of the ganges, that the sea in the bay of bengal
ceases to be affected by the waters of that river, and recovers its
transparency, only at the distance of about twenty leagues from the
coast. (phil. transactions, vol. lxxi.) but the ganges being obstructed
by its delta, and passing through eight channels into the sea, is
probably much less rapid and impetuous than the congo.

to this it must be added, that all the accounts concur in representing,
that the stream of the congo is of a more uniform height, and subject to
much less variation from the dry and rainy seasons, than any tropical
river which is known; and that on a comparison with such rivers, it may
be considered to be _in a perpetual state of flood_. the average
rising of the ganges in the rainy season is stated by major rennell to be
31 feet, being about the same with that of the nile; whereas, the
difference between the highest point of the congo about february, and the
lowest in september, is only about nine feet; and the river, at the
latter period, has all the appearance to a stranger of being in full
flood.

[footnote: ms. letter of mr. maxwell to mr. park, oct. 12, 1804.]

it is this remarkable peculiarity, which distinguishes the congo from
other great rivers of a similar description, and which leads to important
conclusions with regard to its origin and course.

in support, then, of the hypothesis which identifies the congo with the
niger, the following arguments, deduced from the preceding facts and
observations, may be alleged:--1. the great magnitude of the congo. 2.
the probability that this river is derived from very remote sources,
perhaps considerably north of the equator. 3. the fact, that there exists
a great river north of the equator, (the niger,) of which the termination
is unknown, and which may, perhaps, form the principal branch of the
congo. these, in truth, are the only grounds upon which the present
supposition can be fairly said to rest. arguments founded upon
etymological conjectures, supposed resemblances of names, or affinity of
languages, &c. &c., are, for the most part, too arbitrary and fanciful,
and liable to too much uncertainty to be entitled to any place in
disquisitions of this nature. the same remark is applicable to the
narratives and descriptions given by native travellers and merchants,
and, in general, to all _african evidence_ whatever, except when
supported by collateral proof from other less exceptionable sources.

such being the evidence in favour of the hypothesis respecting the congo,
the objections against this theory must be admitted to be weighty and
formidable. the principal of these are, 1. that it supposes the course of
the niger to lie through the vast chain of the _kong_ mountains
(anciently _montes lunae_), the great central belt of africa. of the
existence of these mountains there appears to be no doubt; and from their
situation in the midst of a great continent, they may reasonably be
supposed to be of vast size and extent; in which case it is difficult to
understand, how the niger could penetrate this barrier, and force a
passage southwards. 2. the course of the niger, estimated from its source
in the mountains of senegal (supposing it to be the same river with the
congo, and to flow by wangara and cashna through the centre of africa
into the atlantic), would be considerably more than 4000 miles. but the
course of the amazon, the greatest river in the old or new world with
which we are acquainted, is only about 3500 miles; and, although the
existence of a river considerably greater than any yet known, may be
within the limits of physical possibility; yet, so improbable a
supposition ought not to be adopted upon slight or conjectural reasoning,
or upon any thing much short of distinct and positive proof. to give such
a vast extension to the congo upon the grounds stated by mr. maxwell,
might justly be considered as one of those exaggerations, to which,
according to a remark of d'anville, geographical writers upon africa have
always been remarkably prone, 'en abusant, pour ainsi dire, du vaste
carriere que l'interieur de l'afrique y laissoit prendre.' (mem. de
l'academie des inscriptions, tom. xxvi p. 61.)

[footnote: the following scale (taken from major rennell's memoir of a
map of hindostan, p. 337,) shewing the _proportional length_ of some
of the most considerable rivers already known, may be useful to the
reader on the present occasion.

europe.
thames          1
rhine           5-1/4
danube          7
wolga           9-1/2

asia.
indus           6-3/4
euphrates       8-1/2
ganges          9-1/2
burrampooter    9-1/2
ava             9-1/2
jennisca        10

asia continued.
oby             10-1/2
amoor           11
lena            11-1/2
hoanho (china)  13-1/2
kian keu        15-1/2

africa.
nile            l2-1/2

america.
mississipi      8
amazon          15-3/4

it must be observed, however, that the _magnitude_ of a river
depends much less upon the length of its course than upon the number of
auxiliary streams which fall into it. it is this latter circumstance,
which occasions the vast size of the ganges, compared, for example, with
the nile; although the course of the latter is so much longer. rivers not
fed by auxiliary streams, may even become _smaller_ in consequence
of the length of their course. the editor is indebted for these
observations to major rennell.]

before the editor finally dismisses the subject of the congo, he may be
allowed to express a hope that this distinguished river, which hitherto
has been only known as one of the greatest marts of the slave trade, may
at length be rendered conducive to objects of civilization and science;
and that some use will now be made of this great inlet into africa, for
the purpose of exploring a part of that continent which as yet is
entirely unknown; or, at least, of obtaining more complete and authentic
information relative to the congo itself, which must unquestionably be
considered as a very curious and interesting subject of enquiry. such an
enterprise, according to the opinion of mr. maxwell, would not be
attended with much difficulty. in a letter to mr. park, dated oct. 12,
1804, alluding to the subject of the congo, he speaks of an intention
which he had formed some time prior to park's discoveries, of exploring
that river. his scheme was to carry out with him from england six
supernumerary boats, well adapted for rowing and sailing; each being of
such a size as to be easily carried by thirty people, and transported
across several cataracts, with which the course of the river is known to
be impeded. on his arrival at the coast, he meant to hire about thirty or
forty black rowers, and to sail up the congo with proper arms,
provisions, and merchandize, in the month of may (the dry season south of
the equator) calculating upon an absence from the coast of about ten
weeks. mr. maxwell considered this scheme as perfectly practicable, and
likely to be attended with no very great expense; but he was prevented
from executing his intention by the war of 1793, which made it
inconvenient and unsafe for him to encumber the deck of his vessel with
supernumerary boats.

iv. the fourth and last opinion respecting the termination of the niger,
is that of a german geographer, m. reichard, which was published in the
'ephemerides geographiques,' at weimar, in august, 1808, and is referred
to in a respectable french work, entitled, 'precis de la geographie
universelle, par m. malte-brun.' the fourth volume of this work, which
appeared at paris in the year 1813, (p. 635) represents m. reichard's
hypothesis to be, that the niger, after reaching wangara, takes a
direction towards the south, and being joined by other rivers from that
part of africa, makes a great turn from thence towards the south-west,
and pursues its course till it approaches the north eastern extremity of
the gulph of guinea, when it divides and discharges itself by different
channels into the atlantic; after having formed a great delta, of which
the rio del rey constitutes the eastern, and the rio formoso, or benin
river, the western branch.

without entering into the details of m. reichard's reasoning in support
of this hypothesis, which is often somewhat hazardous and uncertain, it
may be sufficient for the present purpose to observe, that his principal
argument is founded on a consideration of the peculiar character
belonging to the tract of country situated between the two rivers, which
consists of a vast tract of low, level land, projecting considerably into
the sea, and intersected by an infinity of small branches from the
principal rivers. in these and other respects, it appears to bear a
considerable resemblance, according to the best descriptions of that
coast which we possess, to the deltas at the mouths of the nile, the
ganges, and such other great rivers, as by depositing large quantities of
alluvial matter previous to their discharge into the sea, form gradual
additions to the coast. for it may be proper in this place to remark,
that the formation of deltas, even by rivers of the first magnitude, is
by no means universal; some of the greatest that are known being without
them. of this the amazon, plata, and oronoko are mentioned by major
rennell as distinguished instances; to which may now be added, the congo.
the difference appears to be owing to the depth of the sea at the mouth
of the rivers, and perhaps to other circumstances, which are not quite
understood.

[footnote: see reunell's geogr. system of herodotus, 4to. p. 483.]

both of the two rivers, enclosing the great alluvial tract which has been
described (the rio del rey and the formoso), are stated to be of
considerable size, being each of them seven or eight miles broad at the
mouth; and the supposed delta, estimated by the line of coast, is much
larger than that of the ganges: consequently, the two streams, if united,
must form a river of prodigious magnitude. but neither of the rivers has
ever yet been explored; nor has the interior of the country, to any
distance from the coast, been accurately described by any european
traveller. hence, the question whether the two rivers are ever really
united, and whether the tract in question is a complete delta or not,
still remains to be ascertained. with regard also to the course, or even
the existence, of the great river to which this delta is said to belong,
and which m. reichard supposes to come from the northeast of africa,
there is no tradition nor any vestige among travellers or geographical
writers; the whole is purely conjectural. but the supposition, so far at
least as relates to the alluvial origin of the tract in question and the
junction of the two rivers, has great appearance of probability.

on comparing mr. maxwell's hypothesis respecting the niger with that of
m. reichard, which we are now considering, the latter may be said to have
gained something in point of probability, by diminishing the distance
which the niger has to flow in order to reach the atlantic. but the
length of its course, even when thus reduced, is still a considerable
difficulty, and a great incumbrance on the hypothesis. the objection
arising from the niger's being conceived to penetrate the kong mountains,
seems to be nearly of equal weight in both cases, on the supposition that
this vast chain of mountains is of the extent generally imagined; which
there appears to be no reason to doubt.

it may be mentioned as an objection to both of these hypotheses, that no
traces whatever of the mahometan doctrines or institutions are now to be
found on either of the coasts where the niger is supposed to terminate.
in no part of the world has the spirit of enterprise and proselytism,
which properly belongs to the mahometan character, been more strikingly
displayed than in the extensive regions of north africa. its effects are
every where conspicuous, not only in the religious belief of the greater
part of the inhabitants; but even where mahometism is not actually
established, in their manners, and customs, and in the predominance of
the arabic language, which is almost every where grafted upon the native
african dialects. these circumstances, however, are peculiar to north
africa; nothing of a similar kind having been remarked on the coast of
guinea, and still less on that of congo and angola. mr. maxwell also
states in a letter to mr. park, that he had made enquiries of a great
number of negroes who had come down the congo from great distances; but
that he could never hear of any mahometan priests having visited the
countries on the banks of that river. supposing the niger really to flow
through the centre of africa, and to discharge itself any where into the
atlantic, it is reasonable to believe that some of the mahometan
colonists must long since have established themselves on the banks of
that river, and penetrated to the shores of the ocean.




appendix. no. v.


the botanical specimens, mentioned in park's letter, arrived safe in
england, and were received by sir joseph banks, by whose kind information
the editor is enabled to add the following particulars concerning them.

1. _fang jani,_ or self-burning tree. the specimens received under
this name, were branches of a species of _pandanus,_ which, for want
of the parts of fructification, could not be ascertained. the shoots and
bases of the leaves were black and withered, resembling in appearance
leaves and branches that had been subjected to the action of fire. the
leaves, however, above their bases, were green, although dry. on a closer
examination, those parts which appeared like charcoal, were found to
differ entirely from that substance, as they would not give a black
colour to paper when rubbed upon it. besides, it was wholly incredible
that the young shoots and bases of the leaves should break out into a
blaze, while the tops of the leaves, far less succulent than the young
shoots, remained quite free from fire, not being even singed in the
smallest degree.

on a more careful examination, the black colour appeared to be occasioned
by a disease in the plant, of the nature of the mildew or rust of corn,
arising from a parasitic fungus, probably of the nature of the
_puccinia_ of europe; the species of which could not be ascertained
on account of the advanced state of growth of the specimen. this
explanation accords very ill with the declarations of the negroes, who
affirm, that they have often seen fires in the woods, occasioned by the
spontaneous burning of these shrubs; but it is mentioned in mr. park's
letter, 'that _few_ of the natives had seen it actually burning.'

2. _kino._ the origin of this drug, long ago admitted into the
pharmacopoeias of europe, was unknown, till mr. park sent a specimen of
the plant from which the negroes collect it, which proves to be a species
of _pterocarpus_ not yet described by any botanical writer.

3. _tribo_. as no part of the plant was sent except the root,
nothing can be said concerning its species. it appeared to be a
moderately good dye, but had no marked superiority over those already
known, sufficient to induce sir joseph banks to cause experiments to be
made with it. indeed, the quantity was not sufficient for any
experiments, except on a very confined scale.




appendix. no. vi.


the following particulars, tending to shew the increase which has taken
place in the commerce between great britain and africa since the
abolition of the slave trade, have been communicated to the editor by an
intelligent friend, who has great knowledge and experience in the african
trade, and upon whose accuracy and means of information he has the most
perfect reliance.

it appeared from custom-house returns, officially laid before parliament,
that the average annual value of all imports from africa into great
britain for twenty years prior to 1787, fell short of l72,000; and even
this small sum included the imports, not only from the whole western
coast of africa between cape negro in latitude 16 deg south and the
straits of gibraltar, but also from some parts bordering on the
mediterranean. the average annual value of these imports, during the last
five years of that period, viz. 1783, 4, 5, 6 and 7, appears, from the
same official returns, to have been about l90,500. if from this amount be
deducted the value of the articles appearing to have been imported from
morocco and other adjoining countries, there will be left somewhat less
than l70,000 for the value of all our imports from the western coast of
africa; that is, from the country lying between cape blanco, latitude 21
deg north, and cape negro, latitude 16 deg south, being an extent of 4500
miles of coast. the average annual exports from great britain to the
western coast of africa during the same period (exclusive of the exports
connected with the slave trade) may be estimated at a sum not materially
exceeding l50,000.

the compiler of the present statement possesses no documents or means of
information, which enable him to shew what was the extent of the commerce
of great britain with africa (unconnected with the slave trade) during
the period from 1788 to 1807, the year in which the slave trade was
abolished; but there is good reason to believe that it had not materially
increased within that time.

it might be impracticable at present, from the loss of the custom-house
books, to obtain any authentic account of exports and imports during the
last seven years. but this defect of official information is in some
degree supplied by an authentic statement, made out on a particular
occasion by a committee of the african company, from accounts with which
they were furnished from the custom-house, through the intervention of
government. the object of the company in obtaining these accounts was to
procure authentic data relative to some public measure which was in
agitation, connected with the african trade. the following statement was
extracted from the books of the company.

imports from africa into great britain.

1808. l374,306
1809.   383,926
1810.   535,577

[sidenote: exclusive of gold dust, which is not subject to any
custom-house entry]

exports from great britain to africa.

1808.  l820,194
1809.   976,872
1810.  693,911

the great difference between the value of the exports and imports in this
case was accounted for by an experienced officer of the african company
by supposing that a large proportion (from one third to a half) of the
goods exported, was captured by the enemy. if this be the true
explanation, the account must have been balanced by the exports of gold
dust, and the bills of exchange drawn from the british settlements on the
african coast. another supposition (and perhaps a more probable one) is
that a considerable part of the exports found their way into the hands of
the contraband slave traders, and was employed in carrying on their
illegal speculations.

but, even if we consider the imports alone, the increase in the commerce
of africa during the before mentioned period is altogether astonishing;
so much so, as almost to induce a suspicion that there is some fallacy in
the statement, although there does not appear to be any specific ground
for questioning its correctness. for if to the amount of the imports as
above stated, we add the value of the gold dust imported, we shall find
that this additional commerce nearly fills up the chasm occasioned by the
abolition of the slave trade, extensively as that trade was carried on by
this country.

but considering this statement only as a general proof of a great
increase of the african trade, (without attempting to assign the
proportion of increase) let us take another view of the same subject.

the gold coast is about 250 miles in extent, little more than a twentieth
part of the whole coast extending from cape blanco to cape negro.
previously to the abolition of the slave trade, the imports into great
britain from this space of coast used to consist of

                       about 20 tons of ivory valued at ---  l7500
                   and about 1000 ounces of gold dust   ---   4000
                                                        --- l11500

since the abolition of the slave trade the imports from this tract of
coast have greatly increased; and it may be stated upon the undoubted
authority of intelligent persons, perfectly acquainted with the facts,
that the importations have amounted, during the last five or six years,
to the annual value of from l120,000. to l180,000. the annual import of
gold alone is stated to be about 30,000 ounces.

thus it appears that the importation from the gold coast alone, (a space
of 250 miles) into great britain since the abolition of the slave trade,
has been double the amount of the importation from the whole slave coast
of africa (an extent of 4500 miles) prior to that event.

a farther example may be taken from the colony of sierra leone, where a
custom house was first established in may 1812; from whence accounts have
been furnished of the imports and exports into and from that colony
during the two years ending in may 1814.--the amount of the imports
during that period, on which duties were actually paid, was l105,080.
15_s_. 3_d_. being the alleged prime cost of the goods, even
without the cost of packages. in order to obtain the invoice price of the
goods, one third at least must be added to the prime cost for necessary
charges. the amount will then be about l140,000., or, on an average,
l70,000. annually.

the exports from sierra leone during the same period have amounted to
l91,539. 17_s_. 6_d_. being on an average l45,000. annually.
the remainder of imports may be accounted for by the bills of exchange
drawn upon this country for the expenses of the civil establishment and
commissariat. hence it appears that from the single river of sierra leone
the imports into great britain were nearly, and the exports to the same
river fully, equal to the imports and exports (exclusive of the slave
trade) of the whole extent of the western coast of africa prior to the
abolition.

the facts here stated relative to the extent of our innocent and
legitimate commerce with the western coast of africa, must be considered
as highly interesting and important; both as shewing how extremely small
that commerce was prior to the abolition of the slave trade, and how much
it has increased during the very few years which have since elapsed. this
increase has certainly been much more considerable than there was any
good reason for expecting, under the actual circumstances of the case.

if we were told of a country, whose staple article of export trade
consisted of its own inhabitants, its men, women and children, who were
procured (as must necessarily happen in the case of large and continued
exports) by treachery and violence--where the whole population was either
living in continual apprehension of captivity and eternal banishment from
their native soil, or employed contriving the means of inflicting those
evils upon others--we should at once conclude that the very insecurity of
person and property, which such a state of society implied, would of
itself extinguish all the motives to regular industry, and limit the
culture of the soil very nearly to what was required for supplying the
immediate wants of nature.

such in fact were the circumstances of africa prior to the year 1808; at
which time the slave trade carried on by great britain, and the united
states of north america having been abolished by those respective
governments, and the slave trade of france and holland being virtually
abolished by the war, a considerable mitigation of the prevailing evils
took place. a farther improvement was effected about three years
afterwards, by means of the article in the treaty of amity with portugal,
which bound portuguese subjects to confine their trading in slaves to
places in africa actually under the possession of that government. by
this arrangement the whole coast of africa from cape blanco to the
eastern extremity of the gold coast (with the exception of the portuguese
settlement of bissao) were in a considerable degree liberated from the
operation of the slave trade.

the spaniards indeed claimed a right of trading within those limits; but
it was a right which, in its exercise, did not prove so prejudicial as
might have been expected. the slave trade carried on under the spanish
flag, has been found in most instances not to be a _bona fide_
spanish trade, but a british or american slave trade in disguise; and
latterly the portuguese, being excluded by treaty from the whole to the
windward coast except bissao, have begun to avail themselves of the same
disguise. many slave vessels under these circumstances, bearing the
spanish flag, have been captured by the british cruizers: and the
condemnations which have taken place, have tended greatly to abridge the
extent of this trade. still however the course of improvement in this
part of africa, has been extremely retarded by the right which portugal
has hitherto retained of carrying on the slave trade from bissao, and by
the trade carried on either by real spanish ships or by counterfeit
spaniards so well disguised as to escape detection.

besides the trade thus carried on, cargoes of slaves have frequently been
smuggled by english and american traders, availing themselves of the
facilities which the creeks and rivers of africa afford for such
transactions, and taking their chance of escaping the cruizers on the
coast. a contraband trade of this kind appears to have been carried on to
some extent; by means of which various cargoes of slaves have been
transported to the brazils and the island of cuba.

these facts are mentioned for the purpose of shewing that considerable
obstacles to improvement, arising from the partial continuance of the
slave trade, are still experienced, even in that part of africa which has
enjoyed the greatest privileges and exemptions. under such circumstances
it would be most unreasonable to look for that progress in the arts of
agriculture and peace-commerce which we should have been entitled to
expect, in case the suppression of the slave trade had been complete and
universal.

but even under much more favourable circumstances than we have reason at
present to expect, it would by no means follow that the mere removal of
that great obstacle to regular industry and commerce, would in any very
short space of time produce considerable or extensive improvements. the
ignorance, the profligacy, the improvidence and the various other moral
evils, which necessarily accompany the slave trade, will, it is to be
feared, long survive the extinction of that traffic which produced and
fostered them. the whole history of mankind shews that the progress of
civilization is always extremely slow during its earliest stages; and
that the first steps in the career of improvement are constantly the most
painful and difficult. hence, we may be justified in drawing the most
favourable conclusions from the comparatively great increase which has
already taken place in the commerce of africa during a very short period,
in consequence of a partial removal of those evils, which previously had
almost excluded the very possibility of improvement.

_the following_ african words _occurring frequently in the course
of the ensuing journal, it is thought proper to prefix an explanation of
them_.

       *       *       *       *       *

_bentang_, a sort of stage erected in every town, answering the
purpose of a town hall.

_slatees_, free black merchants, often traders in slaves.

_caffle_, a caravan of slaves or of people travelling with any kind
of merchandize.

_dooty_, the chief magistrate of a town or province.

_palaver_, a court of justice, or public meeting; some times a parly
or negociation.

_bar_, nominal money; a single bar is equal in value to about two
shillings sterling.

_kowries_, small shells which pass for money in the interior of
africa.

_barraloolo_, a fowling--piece.

_arrangoes_, a large kind of bead.

_baft_, blue cloth of east indian manufacture, much used in the
african trade.

_pagne_, a kind of cloth, also much used in the same trade.

[illustration: map]

[illustration: map]




journal &c.




chapter i


departure from kayee--arrival at pisania--preparations there, and
departure into the interior--samee--payment to mumbo jumbo--reach jindey;
process of dying cottons at that place--departure from jindey--cross the
wallia creek--kootakunda--madina--tabajang--kingdom of jamberoo--visit
from the king's son--tatticonda--visit from the son of the former king of
woolli--reach madina, the capital of woolli--audience of the king; his
unfriendly conduct--presents made to him and his courtiers--barraconda
--bambakoo--kanipe; inhospitable conduct of its inhabitants--kussai
--nitta--trees; restrictions relating to them--enter the simbani woods;
precautions thereon, and sacrifice and prayers for success--banks of the
gambia--crocodiles and hippopotami--reach faraba-loss of one of the
soldiers--rivers neaulico and nerico--astronomical observations.




chapter i.


april 27th, 1805.--at ten o'clock in the morning took our departure from
kayee. the _crescent_, the _washington_ and mr. ainsley's
_vessel_ did us the honour to fire a salute at our departure. the
day proved remarkably hot; and some of the asses being unaccustomed to
carry loads, made our march very fatiguing and troublesome. three of them
stuck fast in a muddy rice field about two miles east of kayee; and while
we were employed in getting them out, our guide and the people in front
had gone on so far, that we lost sight of them. in a short time we
overtook about a dozen soldiers and their asses, who had likewise fallen
behind, and being afraid of losing their way, had halted till we came up.
we in the rear took the road to jonkakonda, which place we reached at one
o'clock; but not finding lieutenant martyn nor any of the men who were in
front, concluded they had gone by new jermy, &c., therefore hired a guide
and continued our march. halted a few minutes under a large tree at the
village of lamain-cotto, to allow the soldiers to cool themselves; and
then proceeded towards _lamain_, at which place we arrived at four
o'clock. the people were extremely fatigued, having travelled all day
under a vertical sun, and without a breath of wind. lieutenant martyn and
the rest of our party arrived at half past five, having taken the road by
new jermy.

on our arrival at lamain we unloaded the asses under a large bentang tree
on the east side of the town. the slatee (or master of that district of
the kingdom of kataba, called lamain) came to pay his respects to me, and
requested that i would order the bundles and asses to be removed to some
other tree; assuring me that if we slept under it, we should all be dead
before morning. i was for some time at a loss to comprehend his meaning;
when he took me by the hand, and leading me to one of the large notches
in the root of the tree, shewed me three spear-heads which appeared to
have been tinged with blood, lying with their points amongst bone-ashes,
and surrounded with a rope half burnt. i now ordered the bundles to be
removed to another tree, presented the slatee with a keg of liquor, and
received in return a small bullock. here we were forced to purchase
water, the wells of the town being nearly dry. slept very comfortably
under the tree, and at day-break,

april 28th, set out for pisania. we passed two small foulah towns and the
village of collin, and reached the banks of the gambia at half past
eleven o'clock. halted and gave our cattle water and grass: we likewise
cooked our dinners, and rested till three o'clock, when we set forward
and arrived at pisania at sun-set. here we were accommodated at mr.
ainsley's house; and as his schooner had not yet arrived with our
baggage, i purchased some corn for our cattle, and spoke for a bullock
for the soldiers.

april 29th.--went and paid my respects to seniora camilla, who was much
surprised to see me again attempting a journey into the interior of the
country.

[footnote: see park's travels, p. 31, 357.]

april 30th.--mr. ainsley's schooner arrived, and we immediately began to
land the baggage and rice.

april 31st.--gave out the ass saddles to be stuffed with grass, and set
about weighing the bundles. found that after all reductions, our asses
could not possibly carry our baggage. purchased five more with mr.
ainsley's assistance.

may 1st.--tying up the bundles and marking them.

may 2d.--purchased three asses, and a bullock for the people.

may 3d.--finished packing the loads, and got every thing ready for our
journey.

may 4th.--left pisania at half past nine o'clock. the mode of marching
was adjusted as follows. the _asses_ and _loads_ being all
marked and numbered with red paint, a certain number of each was allotted
to each of the six messes, into which the soldiers were divided; and the
asses were further subdivided amongst the individuals of each mess, so
that every man could tell at first sight the ass and load which belonged
to him. the asses were also numbered with large figures, to prevent the
natives from stealing them, as they could neither wash nor clip it off
without being discovered. mr. george scott and one of isaaco's people
generally went in front, lieutenant martyn in the centre, and mr.
anderson and myself in the rear. we were forced to leave at pisania about
five cwt. of rice, not having a sufficient number of asses to carry it.
we were escorted till we passed tendicunda by mr. ainsley, and the good
old seniora camilla, and most of the respectable natives in the vicinity.
our march was most fatiguing. many of the asses being rather overloaded,
lay down on the road; others kicked off their bundles; so that, after
using every exertion to get forward, we with difficulty reached samee, a
distance of about eight miles. we unloaded our asses under a large tabba
tree at some distance from the town, and in the evening i went with
isaaco to pay my respects to the slatee of samee.

the slatee of samee, as well as the slatees of lamain and kutijar, is
subject to the king of kataba; but their subjection is not easily
defined. if a slave runs away from one to another, he cannot be reclaimed
unless the other chooses to give him up. the slatee was very drunk, and
when i told him that i was come to pay my respects to him and would give
him one jug of rum, he told me he would not allow me to pass unless i
gave him ten jugs; and after a good deal of insignificant palaver, i was
obliged to give him two jugs.

may 5th.--paid six bars of amber to the mumbo jumbo boys, and set out for
jindey early in the morning. found this day's travelling very difficult;
many of the asses refused to go on; and we were forced to put their loads
on the horses. we reached jindey about noon. purchased a bullock, and
halted the 6th; fearing, if we attempted to proceed, we should be forced
to leave some of our loads in the woods.

[footnote: for a description of mumbo jumbo, see park's travels, p. 39.]

at jindey they _dye very fine blues with the indigo leaves_. i
readily embraced the opportunity, during our halt, to make myself
acquainted with the process, which i saw in all its different stages.

_mode of dying cotton of a fine blue colour with the leaves of the
indigo plant._

a large quantity of wood-ashes is collected (the woods preferred for the
purpose are the _mimosa nitta_, and _mimosa pulverulenta_,) and
put into an unglazed earthen vessel which has a hole in its bottom; over
which is put some straw. upon these ashes water is poured, which,
filtrating through the hole in the bottom of the vessel, carries with it
the potass contained in the ashes, and forms a very strong lye of the
colour of strong beer: this lye they call _sai-gee_, ash-water.

another pot is filled not quite quarter full of the leaves of the indigo
plant, either fresh or dried in the sun (those used at this time were
dried), and as much of the sai-gee poured on it as will fill the pot
about half full. it is allowed to remain in this state for four days,
during which it is stirred once or twice each day.

the pot is then filled nearly full of sai-gee and stirred frequently for
four days more, during which it ferments and throws up a copper-coloured
scum. it is then allowed to remain at rest for one day, and on the tenth
day from the commencement of the process the cloth is put into it. no
mordant whatever is used; the cloth is simply wetted with cold water, and
wrung hard before it is put into the pot, where it is allowed to remain
about two hours. it is then taken out and exposed to the sun, by laying
it (without spreading it) over a stick, till the liquor ceases to drop
from it. after this it is washed in cold water, and is often beat with a
flat stick to clear away any leaves or dirt which may adhere to it. the
cloth being again wrung hard, is returned into the pot; and this dipping
is repeated four times every day for the first four days; at the end of
which period it has in common acquired a blue colour equal to the finest
india baft.

the negro women, who practise dying, have generally twelve or fourteen
indigo jars, so that one of them is always ready for dipping. if the
process misgives, which it very seldom does with women who practise it
extensively, it generally happens during the second four days or the
fermenting period. the indigo is then said to be dead, and the whole is
thrown out.

in kajaaga and kasson they spread the cloth in the sun, and dry it after
every dip: they then beat it with a stick, so as to make the indigo
leaves fly off it like dust. both practices have for their object the
_clearing of the cloth_, so as to admit the indigo equally to all
parts of it. the process abridged is,

four days indigo and a small quantity of sai-gee.

four days fermenting in a large quantity of sai-gee.

one day at rest.

four days dipping the cloth, four dips per day.

thirteen in all.

to return to the narrative. lamina foffono, one of my fellow travellers
in my former journey from mandingo to gambia, hearing that i was come to
jindey, came from wallia to see me. he told me that karfa was in health,
but had not received the musket i sent him by captain brand.

at five o'clock had a strong puff of wind from the south-east, which
raised the dust and had exactly the appearance of a tornado.

may 7th.--left jindey, but so much were our asses fatigued, that i was
obliged to hire three more, and four drivers to assist in getting forward
the baggage. one of the st. jago asses fell down convulsed when the load
was put upon him; and a mandingo ass, no. 11, refused to carry his load.
i was under the necessity of sending him back to jindey, and hiring
another in his place.

we travelled on the north side of the wallia creek till noon, when we
crossed it near kootakunda. swam the asses over; and the soldiers, with
the assistance of the negroes, waded over with the bundles on their
heads. halted on the south side of the creek, and cooked our dinners.

at four o'clock set forwards, passed kootakunda, and called at the
village of madina to pay my respects to slatee bree. gave him a note on
mr. ainsley for one jug of liquor. halted at tabajang, a village almost
deserted; having been plundered in the course of the season by the king
of jamberoo, in conjunction with the king of woolli. our guide's mother
lives here; and as i found that we could not possibly proceed in our
present state, i determined either to purchase more asses, or abandon
some of the rice.

may 8th.--purchased two asses for ten bars of amber and ten of coral
each. covered the india bafts with skins, to prevent them from being
damaged by the rain. two of the soldiers afflicted with the dysentery.

may 9th.--the king of jamberoo's son came to pay his respects to me.
jamberoo lies along the north side of the wallia creek, and extends a
long way to the northward. the people are jaloffs, but most of them speak
mandingo. presented him with some amber. bought five asses and covered
all the gunpowder with skins, except what was for our use on the road.

may 10th.--having paid all the people who had assisted in driving the
asses, i found that the expense was greater than any benefit we were
likely to derive from them. i therefore trusted the asses this day
entirely to the soldiers. we left tabajang at sun-rise, and made a short
and easy march to tatticonda, where the son of my friend, the former king
of woolli, came to meet me. from him i could easily learn that our
journey was viewed with great jealousy by the slatees and sierra-woollis
residing about madina.

may 11th.--about noon arrived at madina, the capital of the kingdom of
woolli. we unloaded our asses under a tree without the gates of the town,
and waited till five o'clock before we could have an audience from his
majesty. i took to the king a pair of silver mounted pistols, ten
dollars, ten bars of amber, ten of coral. but, when he had looked at the
present with great indifference for some time, he told me that he could
not accept it; alleging, as an excuse for his avarice, that i had given a
much handsomer present to the king of kataba. it was in vain that i
assured him of the contrary; he positively refused to accept it, and i
was under the necessity of adding fifteen dollars, ten bars coral, ten
amber, before his majesty would accept it. after all, he begged me to
give him a blanket to wrap himself in during the rains, which i readily
sent him.

the other presents must all be proportionally great, and the sum of the
whole presents at woolli is as follows:

to _the king_,

     a pair of pistols.    bars.
     dollars                25
     amber                  20
     coral                  20
     white baft              5
                           ---
                            70 bars.

to montamba _the king's own son_,

     amber,                  5
     coral                   5

to slatee deena,

     amber                   1
     coral                   5

to sadoo, jatta's son,

     amber                   5
     coral                   5

to samboo, jatta's second son,

     coral                   5

to whulliri, the prime minister,

     dollars                 2
     coral                   5

to dama, whulliri's younger brother,

     coral                   5

to soliman, the king's chief slave, bars.

     amber                    4
     coral                    4

to dimba serra,

     coral                    6

to different people,

     coral                   10
                             --
                             71

    to the king,             70
                            ---
                      total 140 bars.

[footnote: there is some mistake here; what mr. park calls 71, appears
to be no more than 67; and even according to him, the total ought to be
141. the true amount is 67+70=137.]

may 12th.--had all the asses loaded by day-break, and at sun-rise, having
obtained the king's permission, we departed from woolli. shortly after,
we passed the town of barraconda, where i stopped a few minutes to pay my
respects to jemaffoo mamadoo, a very eminent slatee.

[footnote: mentioned in park's travels, p. 31.]

we reached the village of bambakoo at half past ten o'clock. bought two
asses, and likewise a bullock for the soldiers.

may 13th.--departed from bambakoo at sun-rise, and reached kanipe, an
irregular built village, about ten o'clock. the people of the village had
heard that we were under the necessity of purchasing water at madina; and
to make sure of a similar market, the women had drawn all the water from
the wells, and were standing in crowds, drawing up the water as fast as
it collected. it was in vain that the soldiers attempted to come in for
their share: the camp kettles were by no means so well adapted for
drawing water as the women's calabashes. the soldiers therefore returned
without water, having the laugh very much against them.

i received information that there was a pool of water about two miles
south of the town; and in order to make the women desist, i mounted a man
on each of the horses, and sent them away to the pool, to bring as much
water as would boil our rice, and in the afternoon sent all the asses to
be watered at the same place. in the evening some of the soldiers made
another attempt to procure water from the large well near the town, and
succeeded by the following stratagem. one of them having dropped his
canteen into the well, as if by accident, his companions fastened a rope
round him, and lowered him down to the bottom of the well, where he stood
and filled all the camp kettles, to the great mortification of the women,
who had been labouring and carrying water for the last twenty-four hours,
in hopes of having their necks and heads decked with small amber and
beads by the sale of it. bought two goats for the soldiers.

may 14th.--halted at _kussai_, about four miles east of kanipe. this
is the same village as seesekunda, but the inhabitants have changed its
name. here one of the soldiers, having collected some of the fruit of the
nitta trees, was eating them, when the chief man of the village came out
in a great rage, and attempted to take them from him; but finding that
impracticable, he drew his knife, and told us to put on our loads, and
get away from the village. finding that we only laughed at him, he became
more quiet; and when i told him that we were unacquainted with so strange
a restriction, but should be careful not to eat any of them in future; he
said that the thing itself was not of great importance, if it had not
been done in sight of the women. for, says he, this place has been
frequently visited with famine from want of rain, and in these
distressing times the fruit of the nitta is all we have to trust to, and
it may then be opened without harm; but in order to prevent the women and
children from wasting this supply, a _toong_ is put upon the nittas,
until famine makes its appearance. the word toong is used to express any
thing sealed up by magic.

bought two asses. as we entered the simbani woods from this town, isaaco
was very apprehensive that we might be attacked by some of the bondou
people, there being at this time a hot war between two brothers about the
succession: and as the report had spread that a coffle of white men were
going to the interior, every person immediately concluded that we were
loaded with the richest merchandize to purchase slaves; and that
whichever of the parties should gain possession of our wealth, he would
likewise gain the ascendency over his opponent. on this account, gave
orders to the men not to fire at any deer or game they might see in the
woods; that every man must have his piece loaded and primed, and that the
report of a musket, but more particularly of three or four, should be the
signal to leave every thing and run towards the place.

may 15th.--departed from kussai. at the entrance of the woods, isaaco
laid a black ram across the road and cut its throat, having first said a
long prayer over it. this he considered as very essential towards our
success. the flesh of the animal was given to the slaves at kussai, that
they might pray in their hearts for our success.

the first five miles of our route was through a woody country; we then
reached a level plain nearly destitute of wood. on this plain we observed
some hundreds of a species of antelope of a dark colour with a white
mouth; they are called by the natives _da qui_, and are nearly as
large as a bullock. at half past ten o'clock we arrived on the banks of
the gambia, and halted during the heat of the day under a large tree
called _teelee corra_, the same under which i formerly stopped in my
return from the interior.

[footnote: probably the tree mentioned in park's travels, p. 854.]

the gambia here is about 100 yards across, and, contrary to what i
expected, has a regular tide, rising four inches by the shore. it was low
water this day at one o'clock. the river swarms with crocodiles. i
counted at one time thirteen of them ranged along shore, and three
hippopotami. the latter feed only during the night, and seldom leave the
water during the day; they walk on the bottom of the river, and seldom
shew more of themselves above water than their heads.

at half past three o'clock in the afternoon, we again set forward, and
about a mile to the eastward ascended a hill, where we had a most
enchanting prospect of the country to the westward; in point of distance
it is the richest i ever saw. the course of the gambia was easily
distinguished by a range of dark green trees, which grew on its banks.
the course from teelee corra is represented in the following sketch.

[illustration]

a mile and a half east of prospect hill, is another on the north side of
the road, from the top of which we had a charming view to the south. the
course of the river is from the e.s.e.; no hills on the south side of it,
the whole country being quite level. about ten miles e.s.e.; the river
passes near an elevated table land, which looks, like an old
fortification. at sun-set reached a watering place called faraba, but
found no water.

while we were unloading the asses, john walters, one of the soldiers,
fell down in an epileptic fit, and expired in about an hour after. the
negroes belonging to our guide set about digging a well, having first
lighted a fire to keep off the bees, which were swarming about the place
in search of water. in a little time they found water in sufficient
quantity to cook our suppers, and even supply the horses and asses in the
course of the night.

being apprehensive of an attack from the bondou people, placed double
sentries, and made every man sleep with his loaded musket under his head.
latitude by mer. alt. of the moon, 14 deg. 38' 46" n.

about three o'clock buried john walters, and in remembrance of him wish
this place to be called _walters's well_.

may 16th.--departed from the well as soon as day dawned, and reached the
neaulico at half past eight o'clock. this stream is nearly dry at this
season, and only affords water in certain hollow places which abound in
fish. saw isaaco's negroes take several with their hands, and with wisps
of grass used as a net to frighten the fish into a narrow space. one of
the fish was a new genus.

saw in the bed of the river some negroes roasting a great quantity of
flesh on temporary wooden stages erected for the purpose, as represented
in the following sketch.

[illustration:]

this half roasting and smoaking makes the meat keep much longer than it
would do without it. the flesh was part of a _da qui_ which they
found on the road; a lion had killed it during the night, and eat one leg
of it.

at four o'clock p.m. departed from the neaulico. at five, passed the
ruins of mangelli, where i formerly slept, and at six o'clock halted for
the night at manjalli tabba cotta, the ruins of a village so called. the
wood during this day's march is in general small, and the road is much
interrupted with dry bamboos. plenty of water at the resting place. after
dark took out the telescope in order to observe an immersion of jupiter's
first satellite--

                                                     h. m. s.
          the satellite immerged by watch           14 10 35
          rate + from london                         0  5 48
          too slow by eclipse at kayee               0  0  5
                                                    --------
                                mean time by watch  14 16 28

                time by nautical almanack 14 16 51
                equation                   0  3 58
                                          --------
                mean time at greenwich    14 12 53
                                                    14 12 53
                                                    --------
                                     watch too fast  0  3 35

longitude by three sets of sights taken next morning in order to find the
apparent time at the _place_ 13 deg. 9' 45" w.

it is difficult to account for such a difference in the rate of going of
the watch in the course of one month; but the excessive heat and the
motion of riding may perhaps have contributed to it; for i think my
observation of the immersion was correct.

may 17th.--left manjalli tabba cotta, and after a fatiguing march of
twelve miles, reached _bray_, a watering place. endeavoured to take
the meridional altitude of the sun, by the back observation with
troughton's pocket sextant; and after carefully examining his rise and
fall, with the intervals betwixt each observation, i was convinced that
it can be done with great accuracy, requiring only a steady hand and
proper attention. this was a great relief to me; i had been plagued
watching the passage of the fixed stars, and often fell asleep when they
were in the meridian.

we left bray at three o'clock, p.m. and carried with us as much water as
we possibly could, intending to rest at nillindingcorro till the moon
rose; but there being no water, our guide continued our march to the
river nerico, which we reached at eight o'clock, all the people and asses
very much fatigued. face of the country during this day an open and level
plain with bushes and cibi trees, making the prospect rich, though not
grand. saw plenty of lions' excrement in the wood: they deposit it only
in certain places, and like the cats, claw up the ground in order to
cover it.

may 18th.--people employed all the morning in transporting the baggage
and asses across the river; and as both men and asses were very much
fatigued, i thought it best to halt on the east side of the river till
the afternoon, as it would afford the soldiers an opportunity of washing
their clothes.

                                                       o   '  "
                 observed mer. alt. sun               168 35  0
                 diameter                               0 32  0
                                                      ---------
                                            1/2       169  7  0
                                                      ---------
                                                       84 33 30
            correct for refraction and parallax               4
                                                      ---------
                                                       84 33 26
                                                      ---------
                 zenith distance                        5 26 34
                 declination                           19 31 25
                                                      ---------
                                            latitude   14  4 51

the breadth of the stream of the river nerico is about sixty feet, the
depth of water four feet, its velocity is two miles an hour. the heat of
the stream at two o'clock 94 deg. fahrenheit.




chapter ii.


arrival at jallacotta--maheena--tambico--bady; hostile conduct of the
faranba, or chief, and its consequences--reach jeningalla
--iron-furnaces.--mansafara--attacked by wolves--enter the tenda
wilderness--ruins and plain of doofroo--attacked by a swarm of
bees--astronomical observations--arrival at sibikillin--shea
trees--badoo; presents made to the king--tambacunda--ba deema
river--tabba gee--mambari--julifunda; unfriendly conduct of its chief;
and presents sent to him and the king--visit from the latter--reach
eercella--baniserile--celebrate his majesty's birthday--mode of fluxing
iron--madina--falema river--satadoo--sickness and death of the
carpenter--arrival at shrondo; commencement of the rainy season; and
alarming sickness amongst the soldiers--gold mines; process for
procuring the gold--dindikoo; gold pits--cultivation--arrival at fankia.




chapter ii.


may 18th.--we left the nerico about half past three o'clock, and arrived
at jallacotta, the first town of tenda, at sun-set. from this place to
simbuni in bondou, is two days travel.

may 19th.--halted at jallacotta in order to purchase corn and recruit the
asses. bought plenty of onions, which made our rice eat much better.
town's people fishing in the woods, where the pools being nearly dry, the
fish are easily taken.

may 20.--left jallacotta, and about two miles to the east, passed the
village of maheena, close to which are the ruins of another village of
the same name. it would appear from the number of ruins, that the
population of tenda is much diminished. we reached tendico or tambico,
about eight o'clock: we could not procure a bullock, the inhabitants
having very few cattle. this village belongs to jallacotta; and the
farbana of jallacotta is subject to the king of woolli. about half a mile
from tambico is a pretty large town called _bady_, the chief of
which takes the title of faranba, and is in a manner independent. he
exacts very high duties from the coffles, to the extent of ten bars of
gunpowder for each ass-load.

we sent a messenger from tambico to inform the faranba of our arrival,
and he sent his son in the evening with twenty-six men armed with
musquets, and a great crowd of people, to receive what we had to give
him. sent him ten bars of amber by our guide; but as he refused to take
it, went myself with five bars of coral, which he likewise refused.
indeed i could easily perceive from the number of armed men, and the
haughty manner in which they conducted themselves, that there was little
prospect of settling matters in an amicable manner. i therefore tore a
leaf from my pocket-book, and had written a note to lieutenant martyn to
have the soldiers in readiness; when mr. anderson, hearing such a hubbub
in the village, came to see what was the matter. i explained my doubts to
him, and desired that the soldiers might have on their pouches and
bayonets, and be ready for action at a moment's notice. i desired isaaco
to inform him that we had as yet found no difficulty in our journey; we
had readily obtained the permission of the kings of kataba and woolli to
pass through their kingdoms, and that if he would not allow us to pass,
we had then only to return to jallacotta, and endeavour to find another
road; and with this (after a good many angry words had passed between the
faranba's people and our guide) the palaver ended.

matters were in this state, faranba's son had gone over to bady with the
amber and coral, and we were preparing to return to jallacotta early next
morning, when about half past six o'clock some of faranba's people seized
our guide's horse, as the boy was watering it at the well, and carried it
away. isaaco went over to bady to enquire the reason of this conduct; but
instead of satisfying him on this point, they seized him, took his double
barrelled gun and sword from him, tied him to a tree and flogged him; and
having put his boy in irons, sent some people back to tambico for another
horse belonging to an old man that was travelling with us to dentila. i
now told two of isaaco's negroes, that if they would go with me into the
village, and point out the faranba's people (it being quite dark) who had
come to take the old man's horse, i would make the soldiers seize them,
and retain them as hostages for isaaco. they went and told this to the
two chief men in the village, but they would not permit it. they were
able, they said, to defend their own rights, and would not allow the
horse to be taken: so after an immense hubbub and wrangling, the business
at last came to blows, and the faranba's people were fairly kicked out of
the village.

i was now a little puzzled how to act; isaaco's wife and child sat crying
with us under the tree, his negroes were very much dejected, and seemed
to consider the matter as quite hopeless. we could have gone in the night
and burnt the town. by this we should have killed a great many innocent
people, and most probably should not have recovered our guide. i
therefore thought it most advisable (having consulted with mr. anderson
and lieutenant martyn) to wait till morning; and then, if they persisted
in detaining our guide, to attack them in open day; a measure which would
be more decisive, and more likely to be attended with success than any
night skirmishes. we accordingly placed double sentries during the night,
and made every man sleep with his loaded musquet at hand. we likewise
sent two people back to jallacotta, to inform the dooty of the treatment
we had received from faranba, though at one of the towns belonging to the
king of woolli.

may 21st.--early in the morning our guide was liberated, and sent back to
us; and about ten o'clock a number of faranba's people came and told me
that faranba did not wish to quarrel with me, but could not think of
allowing a coffle to pass without paying the customary tribute; but as i
had refused to do that the evening before, if i would now carry over to
bady such articles as i meant to give him, every thing would be amicably
settled. i told them that, after the treatment my guide had experienced,
they could not expect that i would go to bady alone; that if i went i
would take twenty or thirty of my people with me. this seemed not so
agreeable; and it was at last determined that the horse, &c. should be
brought half way between the two villages, and delivered on receipt of
the goods. i accordingly paid at different times goods to the amount of
one hundred and six bars, being not quite one-third of what a coffle of
negroes would have paid. faranba's people still kept our guide's gun and
sword; alleging, that they were sent away in the night to bisra, a town
in the neighbourhood, but would be sent after us as soon as the person
returned who had gone in quest of them. we accordingly departed from
tambico about three o'clock, and halted for the night at jeningalla near
bufra, or kabatenda, where i formerly slept; my former landlord brought
me a large calabash of milk.

                     o  ' "
mer. alt. tambico  166 56 0
diam.                0 32 0
                   --------
              1/2  167 28 0
                   --------
                    83 44 0
                   --------
zenith distance      6 16 0
decl.                20 9 0
                   --------
latitude            13 53 0
                   ========

may 22d.--halted at jeningalla to purchase corn for our asses. went and
saw some iron-furnaces; they are smaller at the top than those of
manding, thus:

[illustration]

the distance being very great between this place and the next water, we
resolved to travel it by moonlight, and accordingly we left jeningalla.

may 23d, at two o'clock in the morning, and at eight o'clock reached
nealo koba. at the same place where i formerly crossed, the river is not
flowing, but stands in pools, some of which are deep and swarming with
fish. oysters large, but of a greenish colour; did not eat any of them.
about two o'clock resumed our journey, and at sun-set reached a small
foula village; all very much fatigued, having travelled twenty-eight
miles.

may 24th.--halted at mansafara, which is only four miles east of the
foula village. this consists of three towns, quite contiguous to each
other; and near them is a large pool of water. from this town to the
village of nittakorra on the north bank of the gambia is only eight miles
due south. bought corn for the asses in crossing the samakara woods, and
a bullock for the people. much lightning to the south-east, and thunder.
got all the bundles covered with grass, &c. during the night the wolves
killed one of our best asses within twenty yards of the place where mr.
anderson and i slept.

may 25th.--left mansafara, and entered the tenda or samakara wilderness.
about four miles to the east passed the ruins of _koba_, where i
formerly slept. the town was destroyed by the bondou people about two
years ago, and the bentang tree burnt down. at ten passed a stream like
the neaulico, running to the gambia; and shortly after came in sight of
the first range of hills, running from s. s. w. to n. n. e., we came near
them; and at half past eleven halted at sooteetabba, a watering place
within a mile of the hills.

[footnote: called koba tenda in park's travels, p. 353.]

                                  '  "
  obser. merid. alt.         164 45  0
                             ---------
                              82 22 30
                               0 16  0
                             ---------
                              82 38 30
  diff. par. and ref.          0  0  7
                             ---------
                              82 38 23

                                  '  "
  zenith distance              7 21 37
  decl.                       20 65 10
  latitude                    13 33 33

departing from sooteetabba as soon as the heat of the day was over, we
crossed the first range of hills. mr. anderson and i ascended the top of
one of the hills, which from the amazing fine prospect all round, i have
named panorama hill; it has a sugar-loaf looking top, with a number of
wolf-holes in it. the route across the hill, though very difficult for
the asses, was extremely beautiful. in the evening we descended into a
romantic valley, where we found plenty of water, being one of the remote
branches of nealo koba. there was plenty of fish in the pools; but they
were too deep to catch them with the hands. close to the stream are the
ruins of the village of doofroo, destroyed by the dentila people some
time ago. this is considered as an excellent place for shooting
elephants; we saw the fresh dung and feet marks of many of them near the
stream. watched for an eclipse of jupiter's first satellite, but the
planet became clouded.

may 26th.--at day-break ascended from the plain of doofroo, and travelled
over a rugged country, till ten o'clock, when we met a coffle (at a
watering place called _sootinimma_) bound for gambia to redeem a
person who had been caught for a debt, and was to be sold for a slave, if
not ransomed in a few months. there being no water here, we did not halt;
but continued our march, two of the soldiers being unable to keep up. the
main body of the coffle still kept going on, and at half past twelve
reached bee creek; from whence we sent back an ass and two negroes to
bring up the two fatigued soldiers.

we had no sooner unloaded the asses at the creek, than some of isaaco's
people, being in search of honey, unfortunately disturbed a large swarm
of bees near where the coffle had halted. the bees came out in immense
numbers, and attacked men and beasts at the same time. luckily most of
the asses were loose, and gallopped up the valley; but the horses and
people were very much stung, and obliged to scamper in all directions.
the fire which had been kindled for cooking being deserted, spread, and
set fire to the bamboos; and our baggage had like to have been burnt. in
fact, for half an hour the bees seemed to have completely put an end to
our journey.

in the evening, when the bees became less troublesome, and we could
venture to collect our cattle, we found that many of them were very much
stung and swelled about the head. three asses were missing; one died in
the evening, and one next morning, and we were forced to leave one at
sibikillin; in all six: besides which, our guide lost his horse, and many
of the people were very much stung about the face and hands.

during the night got the telescope ready in order to set the watch to
greenwich time by observing an emersion of the second satellite of
jupiter. mr. anderson took the time, and i was seated at the telescope
half an hour before it happened, in order to be sure of observing it. the
satellite emerged by

                                           '  "
  _watch_                         11 49 16
  greenwich                            11 46 30
                                      ---------
  watch too fast                        0  2 46
                                      ---------
  emersion by nautical almanack        11 49 51
  equation                              0  3 21
                                      ---------
  mean time at greenwich               11 46 30

observations of the sun taken with artificial horizon and the watch the
same evening, to determine the apparent time.

  h. m. s. |     '
   5 57 15 | 30 24
   0 58  0 | 30 14
   0 58 42 | 29 43

  h. m. s. |     '
   6  4 15 | 27 11
   0  5  0 | 26 51
   0  5 35 | 26 36

  h. m. s. |     '
   6  6 54 | 25 56
   0  7 34 | 25 38
   0  8 13 | 25 20

observed the meridian altitude of the sun within a mile of bee creek the
same day;

                '  "
  altitude 164 21  0
          ----------
            82 10 30
             0 16  0
          ----------
            82 26 30
          ----------
  z.d.       7 33 23
  d.        21  6  8
          ----------
  latitude  13 32 45

longitude 43 min. 56 sec. of time, or 10  59' west.

may 27th.--early in the morning we set forwards, and after travelling
four miles arrived at sibikillin. here the water which supplies the town,
is collected in a deep rocky hollow. there are plenty of fish in the
pool, but the natives will not eat any of them, nor allow them to be
taken, imagining that the water would immediately dry up. cautioned the
soldiers against catching any of them. at night one of the town's-people
found our guide's horse in the woods, and brought it to the town. gave
him fifteen bars of amber, and a barraloolo, &c.

[footnote: _shea_, or vegetable butter-tree. see park's travels, p.
203, 352.]

may 28th.--at day-break set forwards, and about three miles east of
sibikillin descended into a valley, where i saw the first _shea_
trees, some of them loaded with fruit, but not ripe. about eleven o'clock
arrived at badoo, a small town consisting of about three hundred huts. a
little north of this is another town, called likewise badoo; but they
distinguish them by the names of sansanding and sansanba. the slatee or
governor of each of these towns exacts customs to a great amount from all
coffles, and if refused, they join together and plunder them. judging it
best to settle matters amicably, if possible, i gave him during the day
the following articles; viz.

to amar, the king's younger brother,    bars.
  amber no. 2.                           10
  coral                                   5

to the king of sansanding,
  amber                                  10
  coral                                   5
  scarlet                                 5
  barraloolo                              5
  two mirrors                             2
  scarlet                                 5
  amber                                   6

to the king of sansanba,
  amber                                  10
  coral                                   5
  scarlet                                 5

                                        bars.
barraloolo                                5
to different people, grandees            20
                                       ----
                                         97
                                       ----
[footnote: here is a mistake of mr. park. the total is really 98.]

bought a bullock for                     12
and a sheep for                           5


                                    '   "
mer. alt.                     163  17   0
                             ------------
                               81  38  30
                                0  16   0
                             ------------
                               81  54  30
                             ------------
                     z.d.       8   5  30
                       d.      21  37  30
                             ------------
latitude                       13  32   0


may 29th.--in the forenoon had an opportunity of sending two letters home
to england, via gambia.

in the evening left badoo, and went to tambacunda, about four miles east
of badoo. the river gambia is only four miles distant, south of badoo.
mr. anderson and mr. scott went up a hill near the town, and had a fine
view of it. the course is from the south-east, till it reaches the hills
near badoo; it then turns towards the south. it is called _ba
deema_, or the river which is _always a river_, i.e. it never
dries. the distance between badoo and laby in foota jalla is five days
travel.

purchased two asses.

may 30th.--left tambacunda, and entered the woods. travelled very
expeditiously till eleven o'clock, when we reached a watering place
called fatifing, where we found some green dirty water, so bad that
nothing but necessity would have made us drink it. halted here till half
past two o'clock, when we again set forward and reached _tabba gee_
just at dark: found no water. during the afternoon the country to the
south hilly and beautiful. a little before we reached the halting place
some drops of rain fell.

may 31st.--left tabba gee at day break, and a few miles to the east
passed a round lump of quartz, called by the natives _ta kooro_, or
the traveller's stone; all travellers lift up this stone and turn it
round. the stone is worn quite smooth, and the iron rock on which it
rests is worn hollow by this constant motion. halted during the heat of
the day at mambari, where there is a small village built this season; the
former one having been destroyed by war many years ago. passed in the
course of the forenoon two streams running towards gambia.


                                       '  "
     obser. mer. alt.   -    -    162 43  0
                                  _________
                               1/2 81 21 30
                                    0 16  0
                                  _________
                                   81 37 30
                                  _________
                        z.d.   -    8 23 30
                          d.   -   21 46 10
                                  _________
           latitude   -   -   -    13 22 40
                                  _________


_muianta_, a hill resembling a castle, bearing by compass s. by e.
is distant sixteen miles; _sambankalla_ bearing s., the hills of
foota jalla bearing by compass sw. by w. sw. and sw. by s.--the town of
laby is immediately beyond those hills, which are three days travel from
this place. the river gambia comes down the opening ssw. between muianta
and the hills of foota jalla. the latter have nearly the appearance of
madeira when seen from the sea, but the hills are not so sharp-pointed as
those of madeira.

in the afternoon again set forwards, and four miles to the east passed
the dry bed of a torrent course towards gambia; road rocky; plenty of
white quartz in detached lumps and small pieces. travelled till quite
dark, when we were forced to halt for the night at a place where there
was no water; and of course we all slept supperless.

june 1st.--at day break set forwards, and at ten o'clock arrived at
julifunda, a considerable town founded by people who formerly received
goods in advance from the european traders on the gambia, rio nunez, and
kajaaga; the road to bambara from these places frequently leading through
this place when the other routes were stopped by war. these people, who
trade on credit, are called _juli_ in distinction from the slatee
who trades with his own capital. julifunda was formerly inhabited
entirely by soninkees; but the king of foota jalla made war on them, and
obliged them, as a condition of peace, to embrace the mahomedan religion.
the town contains, i suppose, about two thousand people, including the
suburbs.

in the evening sent our guide to the chief man, who is termed _mansa
kussan_, and is reckoned one of the most avaricious chiefs in the
whole of the road. sent him some amber and scarlet as a present, and told
him that i intended to remain one day at julifunda in order to purchase
rice.

june 2d.--bought some corn and two ass loads of rice; presented mansa
kussan with some amber, coral, and scarlet, with which he appeared to be
perfectly satisfied, and sent a bullock in return; he even prayed for my
safety, and told me that he would do his utmost to get us forwards.
bought an ass for twenty bars of amber. at four o'clock put on the loads
and departed for baniserile.

the whole of the asses were gone, and only mr. anderson and myself
remained, having sent our guide to inform mansa kussan of our departure.
our guide returned, and told us that mansa kussan had said that, unless i
gave him ten bars of all the different sorts of merchandise, he would not
allow us to pass farther up the country; and if we attempted to pass
without his consent, he would do his utmost to plunder us in the woods.

recalled the people and asses, and endeavoured to settle matters in a
friendly manner. suspecting that he would not have used such language
unless he had received assurances from some other towns that they would
join him in attacking us, sent him some more scarlet and amber by our
guide; being unwilling to go singly into the town, having received
information that it was the intention of the king to detain me, with a
view to make me pay handsomely for my release.

mansa kussan seized the money which i paid for the ass in the seller's
hands, and what evinced his hostile intentions still more, he seized the
ass till such time as the palaver should be settled. i shall here give a
list of the different articles of trade paid by me at different times, to
mansa kussan at julifunda.

sent at first,

                    bars.
amber                 16
scarlet               10
barraloolo            10

sent afterwards,

amber                  4
barraloolo             5
amber no. 1.          10

to kussan's brothers

amber                  2
scarlet                2

took with me when i went to pay my respects to him,

amber                 23
beads                  5
looking-glass          1
[table ends]

sent after the asses turned back,

amber                 23
coral                 10
beads                 10
swords                15

sent on the morning of the 3d of june,

a pair of pistols     20
scarlet               10
barraloolo            15
                     ---
bars                 200
                     ---

[footnote 1: here too there is some mistake in park's ms. the true total
being 191.]

                       o  '  "
observed mer. alt.   162 11  0
                      81  5 30
                       0 16  0
                      81 21 30
             z.d.      8 38 30
               d.     22 11 29
        latitude      13 33  0

june 3d--having sent him the last present mentioned in the above list, i
concluded, and was assured by the king's brothers, that no further
demands would be made; but was much surprised when our guide and the
king's brothers told me on their return that i must send ten bars of
gunpowder and ten of flints. here i determined to put an end to the
business; and told the king's brothers that i considered myself as having
paid the king very well for passing through his territory; that i would
neither give him a single charge of gunpowder nor a flint; and if he
refused to allow me to pass, i would go without his permission; and if
his people attempted to obstruct us we would do our utmost to defend
ourselves. the king's brothers and some of the old bushreens insisted on
my sending the gunpowder or some other goods of equal value; but i
assured them that europeans would much rather run the risque of being
plundered in a hostile manner than have their goods (which were brought
to purchase provisions) extorted from them by such exorbitant demands.
after going backwards and forwards to the king, his majesty was pleased
to say he was satisfied; and what surprised me, said that he was coming
to pay us a friendly visit in the afternoon. he accordingly paid us a
visit, attended by a parcel of parasites and singing women. offered me a
few cola nuts, which i desired our guide to take and eat; he likewise
told me that i should have a guide to baniserile.

june 4th.--early in the morning departed, and having passed the village
eercella, remarkable for a grove of large _sitta_ trees, about one
o'clock arrived at baniserile, and halted under a tree near the wells.
this being his majesty's birth day, pitched one of the tents, purchased a
bullock and a calf for the soldiers: in the afternoon had them drawn up,
and fired; and made it as much a day of festivity as our circumstances
would permit; and though we were under the necessity of drinking his
majesty's health in water from our canteens, yet few of his subjects
wished more earnestly for the continuance of his life and the prosperity
of his reign.

baniserile is a mahometan town; the chief man, _fodi_ braheima, is
one of the most friendly men i have met with. i gave him a copy of the
new testament in arabic, with which he seemed very much pleased.

june 5th.--employed in purchasing rice, having received information that
there was a great scarcity of that article to the eastwards. bought the
rice both here and at julifunda with small amber no. 5; and i found that
though a scarcity existed almost to famine, i could purchase a pound of
clean rice for one bead of amber, value 2d. sterling.

purchased three ass loads, and on the 6th purchased two ass loads more,
making in all 750lb. of rice. this day one of our guide's people went
away to purchase slaves at laby in foota jalla, distant three long days
travel. the people here assured me it was only three days travel from
badoo to laby. had a squall with thunder and rain during the night. as
the loads were put into the tent, they were not wetted, but one of our
carpenters, (old james,) who had been sick of the dysentery ever since we
crossed the nerico, and was recovering, became greatly worse. observed
mer. alt. of 0 161 8' latitude 13 35'.

dentila is famous for its iron; the flux used for smelting the iron is
the ashes of the bark of the _kino_ tree. these ashes are as white
as flour: they are not used in dying blue, and must therefore have
something peculiar in them. i tasted them: they did not appear to me to
have so much alkali as the mimosa ashes, but had an austere taste. the
people told me, if i eat them, i would certainly die.

june 7th.--departed early in the morning, and as the carpenter before
mentioned was very weak, appointed two soldiers to stay by him, and
assist him in mounting, and to drive his ass. four miles east of
baniserile came to the brow of a hill, from which we had an extensive
prospect eastwards. a square looking hill, supposed to be the hill near
dindikoo, in konkodoo, bore by compass due _east_.

[illustration: untitled cut]

shortly after crossed the bed of a stream running towards the
_faleme_ river, called _samakoo_ on account of the vast herds
of elephants which wash themselves in it during the rains.

[illustration: map]

saw their foot marks very frequently, and fresh dung. heard a lion roar
not far from us. this day the asses travelled very ill on account of
their having eaten fresh grass, as we supposed.

obliged to load the horses, and at noon halted at a large _pool_ of
water in the bed of the samakoo, called _jananga_.

from the time of our crossing the samakoo to our halting place, we
travelled without any road; our guide being apprehensive that as there
existed a war a little to the south, and the people were in arms; they
might attempt to cut off some of the fatigued asses in our rear.

in the afternoon resumed our march, and travelled without any road over a
wild and rocky country. obliged to leave two of the asses on the road,
and load all the horses. we did not reach the watering place till quite
dark, and were obliged to fire muskets frequently to prevent us from
straying from each other.

june 8th.--early in the morning resumed our march, and about two miles to
the east came to the brow of a hill, from whence we could distinguish the
course of the faleme river by the range of dark green trees which grew on
its borders. the carpenter unable to sit upright, and frequently threw
himself from the ass, wishing to be left to die. made two of the soldiers
carry him by force and hold him on the ass. at noon reached madina, and
halted by the side of the faleme river; which at this season is a little
discoloured by the rain, but not sensibly swelled. the general course of
this river as pointed out by the natives is from the south-east quarter;
the distance to its source is six ordinary days travel. the bed of the
river here is rocky, except at the crossing place, where it is a mixture
of sand and gravel. the river abounds in fish, some of them very large:
we saw several plunge and leap that appeared to be so large as to weigh
60 or 70 lb. the velocity of the stream is about four knots per hour.

in the afternoon got all the bundles carried over, and up the opposite
bank, which very much fatigued the soldiers. when every thing was carried
over, i found the carpenter still more weakly and apparently dying. i
therefore thought it best to leave him at madina till the morning
following. went to the village, and hired a hut for him for six bars of
amber, and gave the dooty four bars, desiring him to make some of his
people assist the soldier (whom i left to take care of the sick person)
in burying him, if he died during the night. in the evening went to
satadoo, which is only one mile east of the river. as there was great
appearance of rain, put all the baggage into one, and slept on the top of
the bundles, leaving the other tent for the soldiers. we had a heavy
tornado with much thunder and lightning.

june 9th.--in the morning the soldier, who had been left to take care of
the sick man, returned; and informed us that he died at eight o'clock the
preceding evening; and that with the assistance of the negroes he had
buried him in the place where the people of the village bury their dead.
purchased corn for the asses, and a large bullock for the people;
likewise one ass.

went into the town in the evening, and presented the dooty with six bars,
requesting a guide to shrondo, which he readily granted. satadoo is
walled round, and contains about three hundred huts: it was formerly much
larger. observed mer. alt. sun 160 deg. 6'; observed mer. alt. jupiter 116
36'.

five of the soldiers, who did not go into the tent, but staid under the
tree during the rain, complained much of headache and uneasiness at
stomach.

june 10th. the soldiers still sickly. left satadoo at sun-rise: several
of our canteens stolen during the night. this forenoon we travelled for
more than two miles over white quartz, large lumps of which were lying
all round; no other stone to be seen. carried forwards a large skinful of
water, being uncertain whether we should find any on the road. at eleven
o'clock reached the bed of a stream flowing to the left, called billalla,
where we found some muddy water.

resumed our journey at half past three o'clock, and travelled over a hard
rocky soil towards the mountains; many of the asses very much fatigued.
the front of the coffle reached shrondo at sunset; but being in the rear
i had to mount one of the sick men on my horse, and assist in driving the
fatigued asses: so that i did not reach the halting place till eight
o'clock, and was forced to leave four asses in the woods. shrondo is but
a small town. we halted as usual under a tree at a little distance; and
before we could pitch one of the tents, we were overtaken by a very heavy
tornado, which wet us all completely. in attempting to fasten up one of
the tents to a branch of the tree, had my hat blown away, and lost. the
ground all round was covered with water about three inches deep. we had
another tornado about two o'clock in the morning. the tornado which took
place on our arrival, had an instant effect on the health of the
soldiers, and proved to us, to be the _beginning of sorrow_. i had
proudly flattered myself that we should reach the niger with a very
moderate loss; we had had two men sick of the dysentery; one of them
recovered completely on the march, and the other would doubtless have
recovered, had he not been wet by the rain at baniserile. but now the
rain had set in, and i trembled to think that we were only halfway
through our journey. the rain had not commenced three minutes before many
of the soldiers were affected with vomiting; others fell asleep, and
seemed as if half intoxicated. i felt a strong inclination to sleep
during the storm; and as soon as it was over i fell asleep on the wet
ground, although i used every exertion to keep myself awake. the soldiers
likewise fell asleep on the wet bundles.

june 11th.--twelve of the soldiers sick. went and waited on the dooty,
and presented him with five bars of amber, and two of beads, requesting
his permission to go and look at the gold mines, which i understood were
in the vicinity. having obtained his permission, i hired a woman to go
with me, and agreed to pay her a bar of amber if she would shew me a
grain of gold. we travelled about half a mile west of the town, when we
came to a small meadow spot of about four or five acres extent, in which
were several holes dug resembling wells. they were in general about ten
or twelve feet deep; towards the middle of the meadow spot the holes were
deepest, and shallower towards the sides. their number was about thirty,
besides many old ones which had sunk down. near the mouths of these pits
were several other shallow pits, lined with clay, and full of rain water:
between the _mine pits_ and these _wash pits_ laid several
heaps of sandy gravel. on the top of each was a stone; some of the stones
white, others red, others black, &c. these serve to distinguish each
person's property. i could see nothing peculiar in this gravel; some
silicious pebbles as large as a pigeon's egg, pieces of white and reddish
quartz, iron stone, and killow, and a soft friable yellow stone, which
crumbled to pieces by the fingers, were the chief minerals that i could
distinguish. besides the above there was a great portion of sand, and a
yellow earth resembling _till_.

the woman took about half a pound of gravel with one hand from the heap,
which i suppose belonged to her; and having put it into a large calabash,
threw a little water on it with a small calabash; which two calabashes
are all that are necessary for washing gold. the quantity of water was
only sufficient to cover the sand about one inch. she then crumbled the
sand to pieces, and mixt it with the water; this she did not in a
rotatory manner, but by pulling her hands towards herself, as shewn in
the following sketch.

[illustration]

she then threw out all the large pebbles, looking on the ground where she
threw them, for fear of throwing out a piece of gold. having done this,
she gave the sand and water a rotatory motion, so as to make a part of
the sand and water fly over the brim of the calabash. while she did this
with her _right_ hand, with her _left_ she threw out of the
centre of the vortex a portion of sand and water at every revolution. she
then put in a little fresh water, and as the quantity of sand was now
much diminished, she held the calabash in an oblique direction, and made
the sand move slowly round on the line ab, while she constantly agitated
it with a quick motion in the direction cd.

[illustration]

i now observed a quantity of black matter, resembling gunpowder, which
she told me was _gold rust_; and before she had moved the sand one
quarter round the calabash, she pointed to a yellow speck, and said,
_sanoo affilli_, see the gold. on looking attentively i saw a
portion of pure gold, and took it out. it would have weighed about _one
grain_. the whole of the washing, from the first putting in of the
sand till she shewed me the gold, did not exceed the space of _two
minutes_. i now desired her to take a larger portion. she put in, as
nearly as i could guess, about two pounds; and having washed it in the
same manner, and nearly in the same time, found no fewer than
_twenty-three_ particles; some of them were very small. in both cases
i observed that the quantity of sanoo mira, or _gold rust_, was at
least forty times greater than the quantity of gold. she assured me that
they sometimes found pieces of gold as large as her fist. i could not
ascertain the quantity of gold washed here in one year; but i believe it
must be considerable, though they wash only during the beginning and end
of the rains. gold is sold here, and all along our route, by the
minkalli: six teelee kissi (a sort of bean, the fruit of a large tree)
make one minkalli: the weight of six teelee kissi is exactly [dram] &
[scruple]. in kaarta they use a small bean called jabee kissi, twenty-four
of which make one minkalli; a jabee kissi weighs exactly four grains. in
kasson, twelve small tamarind stones make one minkalli, which i believe is
the heaviest minkalli in this part of africa. if gold is purchased with
amber, _one bead_ of no. 4 will, in almost all cases, purchase one
_teelee kissi_: but it can be purchased with more advantage with
beads or scarlet, and still more so with gunpowder. i did not purchase
any; but our guide bought a considerable quantity, and i was present at
all his bargain-making.

went in the afternoon to see a brother of karfa taura's; he had a very
large collection of arabic books, and i made him quite happy by adding an
arabic new testament to the number.

june 12th.--left shrondo early in the morning; the sick being unable to
walk, i gave them all the horses and spare asses. travelled slowly along
the bottom of the konkodoo mountains, which are very steep precipices of
rock, from eighty to two or three hundred feet high. we reached dindikoo
at noon; at which time it came on a tornado so rapidly, that we were
forced to carry our bundles into the huts of the natives; this being the
first time the coffle had entered a town since leaving gambia. as soon as
the rain was over, went with mr. anderson to see the gold pits which are
near this town. the pits are dug exactly in the same manner as at
shrondo; a section of the pit would have this appearance.

[illustration]

the notches in the side of the pit serve as a ladder to descend by. the
gravel here is very coarse; some round stones larger than a man's head,
and a vast number larger than one's fist were lying round the mouths of
the pits, which were near twenty in number. near the pits is a stream of
water, and as the banks had been scraped away to wash for gold, i could
distinguish a stratum of earth and large stones about ten feet thick, and
under this a stratum of two feet of ferruginous pebbles about the size of
a pigeon's egg, and a yellow and rusty-coloured sand and earth; under
this a stratum of tough white clay. the rusty-coloured sand is that in
which the gold is found. saw plenty of the gold rust.

when i returned from the gold pits, i went with mr. scott to go to the
top of the hill, which is close to the town. the hill was very steep and
rocky. the rocks (like all the hills in konkodoo) are a coarse reddish
granite, composed of red feldspar, white quartz, and black shorl; but it
differs from any granite i have seen, in having round smooth pebbles,
many of them as large as a cannon shot. these pebbles, when broken, are
granite, but of a paler colour and closer texture. the day was cool; but
after fatiguing ourselves and resting six times, we found that we were
only about half way to the top. we were surprised to find the hill
cultivated to the very summits; and though the people of dindikoo were
but preparing their fields, the corn on the hill was six inches high. the
villages on these mountains are romantic beyond anything i ever saw. they
are built in the most delightful glens of the mountains; they have plenty
of water and grass at all seasons; they have cattle enough for their own
use, and their superfluous grain purchases all their luxuries; and while
the thunder rolls in awful grandeur over their heads, they can look from
their tremendous precipices over all that wild and woody plain which
extends from the faleme to the black river. this plain is in extent, from
north to south, about forty miles: the range of hills to the south seem
to run in the same direction as those of konkodoo, viz. from east to
west. there are no lions on the hills, though they are very numerous in
the plain. in the evening lieutenant martyn fell sick of the fever.

june 13th.--early in the morning departed from dindikoo. the sick
occupied all the horses and spare asses; and as the number of drivers was
thus diminished, we had very hard work to get on. ten of the loaded asses
and drivers went a different road. mr. anderson and mr. scott being with
them, fired their muskets as soon as they observed that the guide was
leading them in a road where were no asses' foot marks. answered them;
and sent the serjeant to their assistance. in half an hour they came up,
having gone about three miles too much to the right. reached a village
almost deserted about one o'clock, and found the coffle halted by a
stream to the east of it. very uneasy about our situation: half of the
people being either sick of the fever or unable to use great exertion,
and fatigued in driving the asses. found, to my great mortification, that
the ass which carried the telescope and several other things, was not
come up. mr. anderson, the serjeant, and our guide rode back about five
miles in search of it; but returned at half past three o'clock, without
being able to find it. presented the dooty of the village with five bars
of amber; requesting him, if he heard of it, to send it forward, and i
would reward him for it. put on the loads; and part of the coffle had
departed, when one of the dooty's sons came and told us that he had seen
the ass, and brought it to the village. went to the village, and paid the
person who found it twenty bars, and the dooty ten bars. mounted the load
on my horse, and drove it before me. i did not reach fankia till seven
o'clock; having to walk slow, in order to coax on three sick soldiers who
had fallen behind, and were for lying down under every tree they passed.
fankia is a small village, four miles north west from _binlingalla_.
here we departed from my former route, and did not touch on it again till
we reached the niger.




chapter iii.


departure from fankia--tambaura mountains, and difficulties in ascending
the pass--toombin--great embarrassments on the road--serimanna--fajemmia
--astronomical observations--increase of the sick--nealakalla--ba lee
river--boontoonkooran--dooggikotta--falifing--losses on the
road--gimbia; inhospitable treatment--sullo--face of the country--secoba
--kronkromo--passage of the ba fing--mode of smelting and working gold
--fatal accident in crossing the ba fing--hippopotami--deaths and losses
on the route--increase of sickness--reach viandry--koeena--danger from
young lions--koombandi--great embarrassments on the road--fonilla--ba
woolima river; difficulties in crossing it--isaaco seized by a crocodile
--boolinkoonbo--distressing situation of the whole of the party--reach
serrababoo--saboseera.




chapter iii.


june 14th.--i halted at fankia, in order to give the sick a little rest,
knowing there was a steep hill to ascend near this place. found myself
very sick, having been feverish all night.

                                   '   "
observed mer. alt. sun,   -  159  39   0
                              ----------
                              79  49   0-1/2
                               0  16   0
                              ----------
                              80   5  30
                              ----------
                 z.d.     -    9  55  30
                 d.  -     -  23  17   0
                              ----------
                latitude   -  13  22  30

bought corn for the asses, and plenty of fowls for the sick.

june 15th.--left fankia: men still very sickly, and some of them slightly
delirious. about a mile n.e. of this village is the passage in the
tambaura mountains, called toombinjeena. the ascent is very steep and
rocky: the perpendicular of the steepest place would not much exceed
three hundred feet. the asses being heavily loaded, in order to spare as
many as possible for the sick, we had much difficulty in getting our
loads up this steep. the number of asses exceeding the drivers, presented
a dreadful scene of confusion in this rocky staircase; loaded asses
tumbling over the rocks, sick soldiers unable to walk, black fellows
stealing; in fact it certainly was _uphill work_ with us at this
place. having got up all the loads and asses, set forwards; and about two
miles from the steep came to the delightful village of toombin. on
collecting our loads, found that the natives had stolen from us seven
pistols, two great coats and one knapsack, besides other small articles.
sent back the horses for two sick soldiers, who were unable to ride on
the horses, and were left at the steep. pitched the tent, and secured the
baggage from the rain.

[footnote: see park's travels, p. 257]

june 16th.--left toombin. just as the people and asses were gone, the
good old schoolmaster whom i mentioned in my former travels came up. he
had heard the night before that i was with the party, and had travelled
all night to come and see me. as the loads were gone on, i told him i
wished him to go forward with me to the place where we should halt; that
i might reward him in some degree for his former kindness. recovered
three of the pistols which had been stolen, and one great coat. set
forwards. about a mile to the east of the village found _hinton_,
one of the sick who rode mr. anderson's horse, lying under a tree, and
the horse grazing at a little distance. some of the natives had stolen
the pistols from the holsters, and robbed my coat case, which was
fastened behind the saddle, of a string of coral, all the amber and beads
it contained, and one barraloolo. luckily they did not fancy my pocket
sextant, and artificial horizon, which were in the same place. put the
sick man on the horse and drove it before me; and after holding him on
and using every exertion to keep him on the saddle, i found that i was
unable to carry him on, and having fatigued myself very much with
carrying him forwards about six miles, i was forced to leave him.

about a mile after i left hinton, i came to two others lying in the shade
of a tree. mounted one on mr. anderson's horse, and the other on my own,
and drove them before me. reached the village of serimanna about half
past twelve o'clock: sent back a horse in the cool of the evening for
hinton, and brought him to the village, being obliged to tie him on the
horse.

gave the schoolmaster five bars of scarlet, one barraloolo, ten bars of
beads, fourteen of amber, and two dollars, which made him completely
happy. i likewise gave him an arabic new testament, which he promised to
read with attention.

june 17th.--finding that hinton was worse, and sparks delirious, left
them to the care of the dooty of the village; having given him amber and
beads sufficient to purchase victuals for them if they lived, and to bury
them if they died. if they recovered, he engaged to join them to the
first coffle travelling to gambia. from serimanna in two hours we reached
fajemmia: this is only a small village, but fortified with a high wall.
the chief, from whom the village has its name, formerly resided at
faramba, to the east of this; but has lately retired here, leaving his
people and slaves at faramba. fajemmia is the most powerful chief of
konkodoo, and holds under his subjection all the country from toombin to
the ba fing.

the customs paid by travellers being always in proportion to the power
and mischievous disposition of the chiefs; those paid at fajemmia are of
course very high.

i paid as follows:

                                  bars
  amber                            15
  beads                            50
  scarlet                          20
  amber                            35
  amber                            14
  barraloolo                       15
                                  ----
                                  149 bars;

a soldier's musket, a pair of handsome pistols, a handsome sword, a great
coat, and one hundred gun flints.

very happy to get so well over the palaver; for he insisted long on
having the customs, or four bottles of gunpowder for each ass, which
would have distressed us very much; and we could have made but a feeble
resistance, being so very sickly. observed an emersion of jupiter's first
satellite.

june 17th, time by the watch 13 deg. 6' 15".

june 18th, altitudes for the time with artificial horizon.

h.  m.  s.       '       h.  m.  s.       '
6   25  35 | 19 36       6   27  41 | 18 43
    26  13 | 19 28           28  19 | 18 24
    26  51 | 19  5           28  50 | 18 12

           6 29 39           17  49
             30 23           17  30
             30 48           17  19

longitude not yet calculated.

                                        '   "
june 18th.--obser. mer. alt. sun, 159  49   0
                                   ----------
                                   79  54   0-1/2
                                    0  16   0
                                   ----------
                                   80  10   0-1/2
                                   ----------
                         z.d.  -    9  50   0
                         d.    -   23  25   0
                                   ----------
                         latitude  13  35   0 n.

our palaver with fajemmia was not finished till the morning of the 19th.
during the 18th, 19th, and 20th i was very sick; and though in general i
was able to sit up part of the day, yet i was very weak, and unable to
attend to the marketing of corn, milk, and fowls. mr. anderson therefore
bought these articles, and attended to the cattle, &c. lieutenant martyn,
the sergeant, corporal, and half the soldiers sick of the fever. boiled a
camp kettle full of strong decoction of cinchona every day since leaving
dindikoo. purchased three asses, and hired our guide's people to drive
four of our asses in addition to the two they already drove, making
altogether six asses, for one hundred and twenty bars.

on the 18th, mr. anderson and one of the soldiers went back to serimanna
to see the two men left there, and ascertain if they could possibly be
carried forward. returned on the 19th, and reported that they were both
alive, but not in a state to be moved, and were themselves anxious to
remain where they were, as it afforded them the only chance of recovery.

june 20th.--when we had loaded the asses, found one of the soldiers
(_old rowe_) unable to ride. paid ten bars of amber, and measured
eighteen days rice for him to one of the best men in the village, who, i
have no doubt, will take care of him. shortly after leaving fajemmia, it
began to thunder, and by the time we had travelled four miles we
experienced a smart tornado, which wetted many of the loads, and made the
road very muddy and slippery. we reached a village nearly deserted,
called nealakalla, about noon. here we found that the ass which carried
the spare clothing was not come up; and as many of the men were very ill
situated, particularly with respect to shoes, i thought it best to send
back two of the men a few miles to see if they could find it. felt rather
uneasy about the men, as they did not return at sun-set. fired several
muskets, but heard no answer. the village of nealakalla is close to the
_ba lee_ or honey river, which we found discoloured, but not
sensibly swelled. saw two crocodiles, and an incredible number of large
fish.

june 21st.--as the two men had not yet arrived, sent forward the coffle
to cross the river: desired mr. scott to fire a musket when they had all
crossed. mr. anderson and myself agreed to stop at nealakalla till noon,
in hopes of hearing something concerning the two men. they arrived about
eleven o'clock, having found the ass and load so near fajemmia, that they
had gone there and slept in the same hut with old rowe, who, they told
us, was recovering and very well pleased with his situation. set
forwards; and about a mile to the n.e. of the village crossed the river
at a place where its course is interrupted by a bed of whinstone rock,
which forms the stream into a number of small cataracts. the people had
to carry over all the loads on their heads, and we found them cooking on
the east bank of the river, and nearly ready to set forwards. mr.
anderson and i stepped across the river from rock to rock without wetting
our feet.

as soon as the men had finished their breakfast we set forwards, and
about two miles east came to a narrow and deep creek, in which was a
stream of muddy water. crossed this with so much difficulty, that some
were for calling it _vinegar creek_. about four o'clock passed the
village of _boontoonkooran_, delightfully situated at the bottom of
a steep and rocky hill. two miles east of this we halted for the night at
the village of _dooggikotta_; where the cultivation is very
extensive, and we had much difficulty in keeping our cattle off the corn.
a tornado during the night.

june 22d.--halted till near ten o'clock, as there was great appearance of
rain. william roberts, one of the carpenters who had been sick since
leaving fajemmia, declared that he was unable to proceed, and signed a
note that he was left by his own consent. passed a small village about
four miles to the east, and travelled on the ascent near a river course
almost the whole day. we had a fine view of _kullallie_, a high
detached and square rocky hill, which we had seen ever since we left
fajemmia. this hill is quite inaccessible on all sides, and level and
green on the top. the natives affirm that there is a lake of water on its
summit, and they frequently go round the bottom of the precipices, during
the rainy season, and pick up _large turtles_, which have tumbled
over the precipice and killed themselves. saw many very picturesque and
rocky hills during the march, and in the evening halted at the village of
_falifing_, which is situated on the summit of the ascent which
separates the _ba lee_ from the _ba fing_. lost one ass, and
80lbs. of balls on the march.

june 23d.--early in the morning resumed our journey; and after travelling
two hours on a level plain, bounded with high rocky precipices on our
right and left, we descended slowly towards the east, and shortly came to
the village of _gimbia_, or _kimbia_. i chanced to be in the
rear, bringing on some asses which had thrown their loads; and when i
came up i found all about the village wearing a hostile appearance, the
men running from the corn grounds and putting on their quivers, &c. the
cause of this tumult was, as usual, the _love of money_. the
villagers had heard that the white men were to pass; that they were very
sickly, and unable to make any resistance, or to defend the immense
wealth in their possession. accordingly when part of the coffle had
passed the village, the people sallied out; and, under pretence that the
coffle should not pass till the dooty pleased, insisted on turning back
the asses. one of them seized the serjeant's horse by the bridle to lead
it into the village; but when the serjeant cocked his pistol and
presented it, he dropped the bridle; others drove away the asses with
their loads, and every thing seemed going into confusion. the soldiers
with great coolness loaded their pieces with ball, and fixed their
bayonets: on seeing this the villagers hesitated, and the soldiers drove
the asses across the bed of a torrent; and then returned, leaving a
sufficient number to guard the asses.

the natives collected themselves under a tree by the gate of the village,
where i found the dooty and isaaco at very high words. on enquiring the
cause of the tumult, isaaco informed me that the villagers had attempted
to take the loads from the asses. i turned to the dooty, and asked him
who were the persons that had dared to make such an attempt. he pointed
to about thirty people armed with bows; on which i fell a laughing, and
asked him if he really thought that such people could fight; adding, if
he had a mind to make the experiment, they need only go up and attempt to
take off one of the loads. they seemed by this time to be fully satisfied
that they had made a vain attempt; and the dooty desired me to tell the
men to go forward with the asses. as i did not know but perhaps some of
the sick might be under the necessity of returning this way, i thought it
adviseable to part on friendly terms; and therefore gave the dooty four
bars of amber, and told him that we did not come to make war; but if any
person made war on us, we would defend ourselves to the last.

set forwards, and half a mile to the east descended into a rocky valley:
many of the asses fell in going down the steep. about noon reached
_sullo_, an unwalled village at the bottom of a rocky hill. shortly
after we halted lieutenant martyn's horse died. this was a _god
send_ to the people of sullo, who cut him up as if he had been a
bullock, and had almost come to _blows_ about the division of him;
so much is horse-flesh esteemed at this place. numbers of large monkies
on the rocks over the town.

june 24th.--left sullo, and travelled through a country beautiful beyond
imagination, with all the possible diversities of _rock_, sometimes
towering up like ruined castles, spires, pyramids, &c. we passed one
place so like a ruined gothic abbey, that we halted a little, before we
could satisfy ourselves that the niches, windows, ruined staircase, &c.
were all natural rock. a faithful description of this place would
certainly be deemed a fiction.

passed a hill composed of one homogeneous mass of solid rock (red
granite) without a detached stone or blade of grass; never saw such a
hill in my life. in the course of the march saw several villages
romantically situated in the crescents formed by the rocky precipices;
the medium height of these precipices is from one hundred to five or six
hundred feet perpendicular. the whole country between the ba fing and ba
lee is rugged and grand beyond any thing i have seen.

we reached _secoba_ at noon. the dooty of this town is fajemmia's
younger brother. presented him with goods to the amount of 50 bars; he
was so much pleased that he said he would go with us till we had crossed
the _ba fing_, and see that the canoe people did not impose on us.

obser. mer. alt. of jupiter             '  "
                                   115 28   0
                                   ----------
                                   57  44   0
                                    0   0  36
                                   ----------
                                   57  43  24
                                   ----------
                                   32  16  36
                                   18  49  10
                                   ----------
latitude                           13  27  26

june 25th.--halted at _secoba_, in order to refresh the sick; bought
plenty of fowls and milk for them.

june 26th.--departed from secoba, accompanied by the dooty and several
people. hired three of the dooty's friends, as guides to kandy, in that
district of fooladoo called gangaran. about seven miles east of secoba
came to the village of konkromo, where we pitched our tents by the river
side. the day was too far spent before we had agreed with the canoe
people, and, as we could not possibly carry all the loads over, thought
it best to wait till next morning. as i thought it probable that we
should have an opportunity of observing an eclipse of jupiter's first
satellite, i took the following altitudes for the time.

h. m. s.      '    h. m. s.      '    h. m. s.      '
 5 25 55 | 45 36    5 30  2 | 43 47    5 36 22 | 40 55
 0 26 53 | 45 13    0 30 42 | 43 28    0 37  3 | 40 35
 0 27 37 | 44 55    0 31 25 | 43 10    0 37 44 | 40 17

observed the emersion of the first satellite of jupiter.

                                            h. m. s.
by watch      -      -      -      -         9 26 20

time by nautical almanack    -  9 24 53
equation      -      -      -   0  2 15
                               --------
   mean time at greenwich       9 27  8
                                             9 27  8
                                            --------
                       watch too slow        0  0 48

longitude 32 m. 24 sec. or 8 deg. 6' w.

june 27th.--early in the morning paid the canoe people 50 bars to carry
over all our baggage and cattle, and likewise presented the dooty of
_secoba_ with some beads.

four canoes sufficient to carry only an ass load and an half at a time,
were provided for this purpose. sent over mr. anderson and six men with
their arms to receive the loads from the canoes and carry them into the
tents. the asses were made to swim over, one on each side of the canoe,
two boys sitting in the canoe and holding them by the ears.

at this place i had an opportunity of seeing their mode of smelting gold.
isaaco had purchased some gold in coming through konkodoo, and here he
had it made into a large ring. the smith made a crucible of common red
clay and dried it in the sun: into this he put the gold, without any flux
or mixture whatever; he then put charcoal under and over it, and blowing
the fire with the common double bellows of the country, soon produced
such a heat as to bring the gold into a state of fusion. he then made a
small furrow in the ground, into which he poured the melted gold; when it
was cold he took it up, and heating it again, soon hammered it into a
square bar. then heating it again, he twisted it by means of two pairs of
pincers into a sort of screw; and lengthening out the ends, turned them
up so as to form a massy and precious ring.

when the baggage and cattle were all transported over, i sent over the
men, and embarked myself in the last canoe; but as one of the soldiers in
the other canoe had gone out to purchase something, i made the canoe in
which i was shove off, telling the men to come off the moment the man
returned. i found it difficult to sit in the canoe so as to balance it,
though it contained only three people besides the rower. we had just
landed on the east bank, when we observed the canoe, in which were the
three soldiers, pushing off from the opposite bank. it shortly after
overset, and though the natives from the shore swam in to their
assistance, yet j. cartwright was unfortunately drowned. the natives
dived and recovered two of the muskets, and cartwright's body; they put
the body in the canoe and brought it over. i used the means recommended
by the humane society, but in vain. we buried him in the evening on the
bank of the river.

the ba fing is here a large river quite navigable; it is swelled at this
time about two feet, and flows at the rate of three knots per hour. the
people here are _all thieves:_ they attempted to steal several of
our loads, and we detected one carrying away the bundle in which was all
our medicines. we could not sleep with the noise of the hippopotami,
which came close to the bank and kept snorting and blowing all night. the
night being clear, observed the emersion of jupiter's second satellite;
it emerged

                                          h. m. s.
by watch      -      -      -      -     11 25 55
time by nautical almanack      11 24 40
equation      -      -      -   0  1 53
                               --------
      mean time at greenwich   11 26 33
                                         11 26 33
                                         --------
                      watch too slow      0  0 38

june 28th.--purchased an ass for four minkallis of gold, and a horse for
45 bars. set forwards about seven o'clock. after travelling four miles,
the ass i had purchased lay down, and i found it impossible to raise him.
took off the load and left him. at ten o'clock came close to the bottom
of a high rocky hill, which rises like an immense castle from the level
plain: it is called _sankaree_: and on enquiring about a large heap
of stones near the foot of the precipice, i was told that the town of
madina, which was in the vicinity, was some years ago stormed by the
kaartans, and that the greater part of the inhabitants fled towards this
hill. some however were killed on the road, and these stones were
collected over the grave of one of them. he said there were five more
such near the hill, and that every person in passing, if he belongs to
the same family or _contong_, thinks himself bound to throw a stone
on the heap to perpetuate the memory of their friend. these heaps are
precisely what in scotland are called _cairns_. this hill is
accessible only by one very narrow and difficult path. they assured me
that there was abundance of water on the summit at all seasons, and that
the huts built by the madina people were still standing on the summit,
though out of repair.

at eleven o'clock crossed a stream, like a mill stream, running north. we
halted on the east side of it; found that one of the asses with a load of
beads had not come up. the soldier who drove it (bloore), without
acquainting any person, returned to look for it. shortly after the ass
and load were found in the woods. sent the serjeant after bloore on one
of the horses; he rode back as far as sankaree without seeing him, and
concluded he had lost the path. he found one of the sick (walter) who had
wandered from the track (for there was no road); and had laid himself
down among the bushes till some of the natives discovered him. paid the
natives ten bars of amber, and desired them to look for bloore.

in the afternoon collected the asses for marching. had great difficulty
in finding the horses, one of which (the serjeant's), after all our
search could not be found. as it was in vain to wait for bloore, put on
the loads and departed. it is to be observed that there is no path-way in
these woods, and we found much difficulty in keeping together: fired
muskets frequently to give intimation of our line of march. after
travelling about four miles, shaddy walter, the sick man before
mentioned, became so exhausted that he could not sit on the ass. he was
fastened on it, and held upright; he became more and more faint, and
shortly after died. he was brought forwards to a place where the front of
the coffle had halted, to allow the rear to come up. here when the coffle
had set forwards, two of the soldiers with their bayonets, and myself
with my sword, dug his grave in the wild desert; and a few branches were
the only laurels which covered the tomb of the brave.

we did not come up to the coffle till they had halted for the night near
a pool of water shaded with ground palm-trees. here i was informed that
two of the soldiers were not come up; one (baron) was seen about a mile
from the halting place; the other (hill) was supposed to be three or four
miles behind. fired two muskets every quarter of an hour; one to call
their attention, and the other about half a minute after to give the
direction. at half past seven hill came up, being directed entirely by
the sound of the muskets. at eleven o'clock saw some lights in the woods,
and heard people holla: in a little time five people came, bringing with
them bloore, the man who had gone in quest of the ass. he had gone back
as far as the black river, crossed it and made signs to the people about
the ass and the load. as they did not rightly understand him, they
thought that some party had fallen on the coffle, and that this soldier
had run away. they therefore came with him to see if they could come in
for their share, or at least receive some reward for coming along with
the man. paid them ten bars of amber, and desired them to look for baron,
and i would give them ten bars more if they found him.

june 29th.--at day-break fired muskets for baron; and as it was evident
he must have wandered from the track made by the asses, and it was in
vain to look for him in so extensive a wilderness, at half past six
o'clock loaded the asses and set out. two more of the soldiers affected
with the fever. route in the morning rocky. traveled twelve miles without
halting, in order to reach a watering place. about two miles before we
came to the watering place, bloore, the soldier who had come up during
the night, sat down under the shade of a tree; and when i desired him to
proceed, he said he was rather fatigued, and when he had cooled himself,
he would follow. i assured him that the halting place was only a very
little way off, and advised him by all means not to fall asleep. we
halted on an elevated table land: the water was only rain collected in
the hollow places of the rock. at half past four o'clock, as bloore had
not come up, i sent the sergeant on one of the horses to bring him
forward; he returned at sun-set, having seen nothing of him, and having
rode several miles past the place. i suspected that the serjeant might
have rode past him asleep under the tree; i therefore got three
volunteers to go with me, and look for him. it was now quite dark. we
collected a large bundle of dry grassland taking out a handful at a time,
kept up a constant light, in order to frighten the lions which are very
numerous in these woods. when we reached the tree under which he lay
down, we made a fire. saw the place where he had pressed down the grass,
and the marks of his feet: went to the west along the pathway, and
examined for the marks of his feet, thinking he might possibly have
mistaken the direction. found none: fired several muskets. hollowed, and
set fire to the grass. returned to the tree and examined all round; saw
no blood nor the foot marks of any wild beasts. fired six muskets more.
as any further search was likely to be fruitless, (for we did not dare to
walk far from the track for fear of losing ourselves) we returned to the
tents. one of isaaco's people shot an antelope in the evening, which more
than supplied us all with meat. much troubled in the night with wolves.

june 30th.--early in the morning set forwards, and descended from the
table land into a more fertile plain. vast numbers of monkies on the
rocks. reached kandy after a march of ten miles, all very much fatigued.
this is but a small town; the large town having been taken and burnt by
daisy's son about two years ago, and all the people carried away. mr.
anderson and mr. scott sick of the lever.

july 1st.--covered a load of beads with the skin of the antelope. one of
the bundles containing all our small _seed beads_ stolen during the
night; made all the search i could, but in vain: i could not recover it.
as we were short of rice, and none could be purchased here, determined to
push on as quick as possible; but the men were so very sickly, that i
judged it imprudent to trust the baggage and asses without proper
drivers. employed in dividing the asses amongst the healthy men.

july 2d.--set forwards. two more of the soldiers sick of the fever. when
we had travelled about three miles, one of the soldiers (roger m'millan)
became so delirious, that it was found impossible to carry him forwards.
left him at a village called _sanjeekotta_. i regretted much being
under the necessity of leaving in the hour of sickness and distress, a
man who had grown old in the service of his country. he had been
thirty-one years a soldier, twelve times a corporal, nine times a
serjeant; but an unfortunate attachment to the _bottle_ always
returned him into the ranks.

we reached _koeena_ about three o'clock, all very much fatigued. i
felt myself very sickly, having lifted up and reloaded a great many asses
on the road. the village of _koeena_ is walled round, and it is
surrounded on three sides with rocky precipices. had a severe tornado at
seven o'clock, which put out the watch-fire and made us all crowd into
the tents. when the violence of the squall was over, we heard a
particular sort of roaring or growling, not unlike the noise of a wild
boar; there seemed to be more than one of them, and they went all round
our cattle. fired two muskets to make them keep at a distance; but as
they still kept prowling round us, we collected a bunch of withered
grass, and went with lieutenant martyn in search of the animals,
suspecting them to be wild boars. we got near one of them, and fired
several shots into the bush, and one at him as he went off among the long
grass. when we returned to the tents, i learned by enquiring of the
natives that the animals we had been in search of were not boars, but
young lions; and they assured me that unless we kept a very good look out
they would probably kill some of our cattle during the night. about
midnight these young lions attempted to seize one of the asses, which so
much alarmed the rest that they broke their ropes, and came at full
gallop in amongst the tent ropes. two of the lions followed them, and
came so close to us that the sentry cut at one of them with his sword,
but did not dare to fire for fear of killing the asses. neglected to wind
up the watch.

july 3d.--departed from koeena, and halted during the heat of the day at
koombandi, distant six miles. here the guides that i had hired from
kandy, were to return; and i had agreed with them to carry back
m'millan's knapsack, and some amber and beads to purchase provisions for
him; but three people came up to us with two asses for sale, and they
informed me that they left sanjeekotta early in the morning; that the
soldier who was left there, had died during the night, and the natives
had buried him in a corn field near the town. purchased the asses in
order to carry forwards the sick.

about three o'clock left koombandi. mr. anderson and mr. scott were so
sick, that they wished to remain here for the night; with much
entreating, persuaded them to mount their horses and go on. three miles
east of the village, william alston, one of the seamen whom i received
from his majesty's ship squirrel, became so faint that he fell from his
ass, and allowed the ass to run away. set him on my horse, but found he
could not sit without holding him. replaced him on the ass, but he still
tumbled off: put him again on the horse, and made one man keep him
upright, while i led the horse. but as he made no exertion to keep
himself erect, it was impossible to hold him on the horse, and after
repeated tumbles he begged to be left in the woods till morning. i left a
loaded pistol with him, and put some cartridges into the crown of his
hat. at sun-set reached fonilla, a small walled village on the banks of
the wonda, which is here called _ba woolima_ (red river), and
towards its source it has the name of _ba qui_ (white river), the
middle part of its course being called _wonda._ it had swelled two
feet perpendicular by the rains which had fallen to the southward, and
was very muddy; but cannot even in its present state be reckoned a large
river.

july 4th--agreed with the canoe people to carry over our baggage and
cattle for sixty bars. there being but one canoe, it was near noon before
all the bundles were carried over. the transporting of the asses was very
difficult. the river being shallow and rocky; whenever their feet touched
the bottom they generally stood still. our guide, isaaco, was very active
in pushing the asses into the water, and shoving along the canoe; but as
he was afraid that we could not have them all carried over in the course
of the day he attempted to drive six of the asses across the river
farther down where the water was shallower. when he had reached the
middle of the river a crocodile rose close to him, and instantly seizing
him by the left thigh, pulled him under water. with wonderful presence of
mind he felt the head of the animal, and thrust his finger into its eye;
on which it quitted its hold, and isaaco attempted to reach the further
shore, calling out for a knife. but the crocodile returned and seized him
by the other thigh, and again pulled him under water; he had recourse to
the same expedient, and thrust his fingers into its eyes with such
violence that it again quitted him; and when it rose, flounced about on
the surface of the water as if stupid, and then swam down the middle of
the river. isaaco proceeded to the other side, bleeding very much. as
soon as the canoe returned i went over, and found him very much
lacerated. the wound on the left thigh was four inches in length: that on
the right not quite so large, but very deep; besides several single teeth
wounds on his back. drew the lips of the wounds together with slips of
adhesive plaister secured with a roller; and as we were not far from a
village, he thought it best for him to go forwards before his wounds had
become very painful. he accordingly rode forwards to the village of
boolinkoomboo on one of our horses. found myself very sick, and unable to
stand erect without feeling a tendency to faint; the people so sickly
that it was with some difficulty we got the loads put into the tents,
though it threatened rain. to my great astonishment, _ashton_, the
sailor whom i had left in the woods the evening before, came up quite
naked, having been stripped of his clothes by three of the natives during
the night. found his fever much abated.

[footnote: the name is thus written in mr. park's ms.; but it seems to be
a mistake for _alston_, v. ante p. 87.]

july 5th.--with great difficulty got the asses loaded, but had not a
sufficient number of spare asses for the sick. set one of them on my
horse, and walked, feeling a remission of the fever, though still very
giddy and unwell. we soon reached boolinkoomboo, it being only two miles
from the landing place. this village is sometimes called moiaharra: it
does not contain above one hundred people. on collecting the asses, found
that three were missing, besides a sickly one, which was too weak to
cross the river, and was eaten by the people of fonilla. all this
diminished our means of carrying forward the sick.

i now found my situation very perplexing. to go forward without isaaco to
keminoom, i knew would involve us in difficulties; as keminoom's sons are
reckoned the greatest thieves and blackguards on the whole route. to stop
till isaaco recovered (an event which seemed very doubtful), would throw
us into the violence of the rains. there was no other person that i could
trust; and, what was worst of all, we had only _two days rice_, and
a great scarcity prevailed in the country. i determined to wait three
days, to see how isaaco's wounds looked, and in the mean time sent two of
his people away to serracorra with an ass and three strings of no. 5.
amber to purchase rice.

july 6th.--all the people either sick, or in a state of great debility,
except one. bought all the milk i could find, and boiled a camp kettle
full of strong decoction of barks every day.

july 7th.--dressed isaaco's wounds: they looked remarkably well.

july 8th.--waiting very anxiously for the return of isaaco's people with
the rice, being now on very short allowance.

july 9th.--in the afternoon isaaco's people returned, bringing with them
l23 lbs. of clean rice; isaaco's wounds looking well, and beginning to
discharge good pus. latitude by uncertain obs. mer. alt. of the sun 13
11'.

july 10th.--departed from boolinkoomboo, and eight miles n.e. passed the
village of serrababoo; close to which is a stream called kinyaco, about
knee deep, running to the n.w. it was very difficult to cross, on account
of the fissures in the rocks which form its bed. several of the asses
fell, and their loads were of course wet. from this we travelled due
north, over a ridge of rocks, which formed the only passage across a
chain of hills. when we had crossed this, we travelled six miles on a
rocky and almost impassable road, and a little before sun-set, to our
great joy, reached sabooseera (dooty matta). this is a scattered unwalled
village. latitude by mer. alt. of moon 13 deg. 50'.




chapter iv.


arrival at keminoom, or manniakorro, on the ba lee river.--visit to the
chief.--depredations upon the coffle by the inhabitants--continued
attacks from banditti as far as the ba woolima river--difficulties in
passing it--temporary bridge made by the natives.--astronomical
observations--arrival at mareena; inhospitable conduct of his
inhabitants--bangassi; interview with the king--continued sickness, and
deaths among the soldiers.--arrival at nummasoolo--obliged to leave five
of the sick behind--reach surtaboo--sobee--affray between isaaco and two
soldiers--balanding--balandoo--more of the soldiers fall
behind--koolihori--greatly annoyed by wolves.




chapter iv.


july 11th.--from sabooseera, or mallaboo, we travelled towards the west
and north west till noon, when we arrived at keminoom, or maniakorro.
this is a walled town fortified in the strongest manner i have yet seen
in africa; a section of the walls and ditch would have nearly the
following appearance,

[illustration]

pitched our tents under a tree near the ba lee, which runs here with
great velocity, and breaks into small cataracts.

july 12th.--went in the morning with isaaco and waited on keminoom, or
mansa numma, as he is commonly called. i took with me

                      bars.
   amber, no. 2        25
   ditto, no. 4        15
   barraloolos         20
   beads               33
   scarlet             10
   balls and flints     2
   looking glasses      5
                      ___
                      100;

a soldier's musket,
a pair of handsome pistols silver mounted.

he sent them all back, and i was forced to put a silver mounted gun on it
before he would accept of it; and likewise

to eerujama, the king's brother,
   amber, no. 2           10
   barraloolo              5

to his son,
   amber                  10
   to the king's people   10
   to eight finnis for singing some nonsense   8

observed mer. alt. of the sun 163  24'; latitude 14  0'

in the evening had such of the soldiers as were most healthy dressed in
their red coats; and at numma's request went with them to the town, where
they went through some movements, and fired.

july 13th.--very desirous to be gone, as we found the people thieves to a
man; in fact we have never yet been at a place where so much theft and
impudence prevails. this can only be accounted for, by considering that
mansa numma is the reputed father of more than thirty children; and as
they all consider themselves as far above the common people, they treat
every person with contempt, and even steal in the most open manner. by
the side of the river are a great number of human bones (more than thirty
skulls.) on enquiring the reason, i was informed that mansa numma always
inflicted capital punishments himself, and that the bones i saw were
those of criminals. i had reason to regret, that capital punishments
seldom or never extend to the real or reputed descendants of the king.

july 14th.--as soon as day dawned, struck the tents and loaded the asses.
the townspeople gathered round us in crowds. they had stolen during our
stay here four great coats, a large bundle of beads, a musket, a pair of
pistols, and several other things. before we had advanced a musket shot
from the town (though we had one of the king's sons on horseback as a
protector), one of the townspeople carried away a bag from one of the
asses, containing some things belonging to one of the soldiers. the
king's son, lieutenant martyn, and myself rode after him, and were lucky
enough to come up with him, and recover the bag; but before we could
rejoin the coffle, another had run off with a musket that was fastened on
one of the loads.

we proceeded in this manner in a constant state of alarm; and i had great
reason to fear that the impudence of the people would provoke some of the
soldiers to run, them through with their bayonets. about two miles from
maniakorro, as we were ascending a rocky part of the road, several of the
asses fell with their loads. i rode a little from the path to see if a
more easy ascent could not be found; and as i was holding my musket
carelessly in my hand, and looking round, two of numma's sons came up to
me; one of them requested me to give him some snuff. suspecting no ill
treatment from two people, whom i had often seen with the king, and at
our tents, i turned round to assure him that i never took snuff; at this
instant the other (called woosaba) coming up behind me, snatched the
musket from my hand, and ran off with it. i instantly sprung from the
saddle and followed him with my sword, calling to mr. anderson to ride
back, and tell some of the people to look after my horse. mr. anderson
got within musket shot of him, but seeing it was numma's son, had some
doubts about shooting him, and called to me if he should fire. luckily i
did not hear him, or i might possibly have recovered my musket, at the
risk of a long palaver, and perhaps the loss of half our baggage. the
thief accordingly made his escape amongst the rocks, and when i returned
to my horse, i found the other of the royal descendants had stolen my
great coat.

i went and informed the king's son, whom we had hired as a guide, of what
had happened; and requested to know how i should act if any of the people
should steal from the baggage. he assured me that after what had
happened, i should be justified in shooting the first that attempted to
steal from the loads. made such of the soldiers as were near me load
their muskets and be ready. the sky became cloudy, and by the time that
we had advanced about five miles from the town, we experienced a very
heavy tornado. during the rain another of numma's sons snatched up and
run off with one of the soldiers muskets and a pair of pistols, which he
had laid down while he was reloading his ass.

we halted amongst the rocks and put off the loads, all very wet. turned
the asses to feed, and cooked some rice, although it rained very heavily.
one of the negro boys gave the alarm that three people were driving away
our asses. i followed with some of our people: the thieves made their
escape amongst the rocks, but without carrying away any of the asses,
though they had untied the feet of three and fastened a fourth to a bush.
collected the asses and began to load. whilst we were loading one of the
asses strayed a little from the rest, about two hundred yards, and to my
astonishment a man came from amongst the rocks, took off the load, and
began to cut it open with his knife. before any person could come at him,
he left the load and run up the rocks. mr. scott and one of the soldiers
fired at him, but did not hit him. went on. road very rocky. told the
soldiers to shoot the first that took any thing from the baggage. found
some of the asses and loads lying at the difficult places in the road,
and often two loads with only one half-sick soldier to guard them. kept
in the rear, as i perceived they had a mind to take some of the loads and
asses. i saw the thieves peeping over the rocks, and making signs to
their comrades, who seemed very desirous of assisting us in putting on
our loads. put one of the loads on my horse, and another on mr.
anderson's, and luckily cleared the difficult passes of the rocks by sun
set, without losing any thing, though surrounded by at least a dozen
experienced thieves. when we reached the bottom of the rocky pass, we
went on with more ease, and came up to the rest of the party about eight
o'clock. they had stopped for the night in the woods, and so were all our
clothes; [footnote: it is thus in mr. park's ms. there seems to be some
omission.] and in fact we passed a very uncomfortable night amongst the
wet grass, and exposed to a very heavy dew.

july 15th.--early in the morning proceeded, and went on very slowly in
the rear, by which means we were separated from the front. horses loaded
as usual. when we reached the cultivated land, which surrounds the
village of ganamboo, we came up to one of the soldiers, who informed us,
that a man habited as a slave had come from amongst the bushes, and
instantly seized on his musket and knapsack, which were fastened on the
top of his load. the soldier struggled with him for his musket, and
wrested it from him; on which the thief let go the knapsack, and
attempted to make off; but when he heard the soldier cock his piece,
expecting to be instantly shot, he threw himself down on the road and
roared out in the most pitiable manner. the soldier took a steady aim at
him, but unfortunately his musket flashed in the pan, and the slave
started up and ran in amongst the bushes.

ganamboo is only a small walled village: it is situated about ten miles
east half north from maniakorro.

july 10th.--left ganamboo, but the soldiers and asses were so much
fatigued, that we were forced to stop at ballandoo (dooty mari umfa)
during the night. we had the most tremendous storm of thunder and
lightning i ever saw. i was so confident that the tent would be struck
by the lightning, that i went to some distance to avoid the explosion of
our gunpowder.

july 17th.--left ballandoo at eight o'clock, and reached _seransang_
about noon. all horses loaded; mine fell down under his load, and i was
forced to sit by him till an ass was sent from the halting place.
seransang is a scattered but populous town, and the land is cleared
round it for a great distance. one of our best asses stolen during the
night.

july 18th.--departed from seransang, having shifted the loads so as to
have the horses free, in order to prevent theft. we had not travelled
much above a mile, when two suspicious people came up. one of them
walked slowly in the rear; and the other passed on, seemingly in great
haste. i desired mr. anderson to watch the one in the rear, whilst i
rode on at such a distance as just to keep sight of the other. the road
making a turn, he was concealed from me by the bushes, and took
advantage of this opportunity to carry away a great coat from a load
which was driven by one of the sick men. i fortunately got a view of him
as he was running off among the bushes, and galloping in a direction so
as to get before him, quickly came so near him that he leaped into some
very thick bushes. when i rode round, he went out at the side opposite
to me; and in this manner i hunted him amongst the bushes for some time,
but never losing sight of him. at last he run past a spreading tree, and
jumping back, stood close to the trunk of it. i thought i should
certainly lose him if i did not avail myself of the present opportunity.
i accordingly fired, and dropping my musket on the pummel of the saddle,
drew out one of the pistols, and told him if he offered to move, i would
instantly shoot him dead. "do not kill me, white man," he exclaimed, "i
cannot run from you, you have broke my leg." i now observed the blood
streaming down his leg; and when he pulled up his cloth, i saw that the
ball had passed through his leg about two inches below the knee joint.
he climbed a little way up the tree, which was of easy ascent; always
exclaiming in a pitiable tone of voice, "do not kill me." several of the
people belonging to the coffle, on hearing the shot fired, came running;
and amongst others the guide appointed us by keminoom, who insisted that
i should instantly shoot the thief dead; otherwise he said i did not
fulfil the orders of his master, who had directed me to shoot every
person that stole from me. i had great difficulty in preventing him from
killing him, and was happy to recover the great coat, and leave the
thief bleeding amongst the branches of the tree.

we proceeded without further molestation till about three o'clock in the
afternoon, when it came on a tornado. during the rain one of the sick
had fallen a little behind, and four people seizing him, stripped off
his jacket. he followed them at a distance; and when they came up to mr.
anderson and myself, he called out to us to shoot one of them, as they
had taken his jacket. i had my pocket handkerchief on the lock of my gun
to keep the priming dry. when they observed me remove it, one of them
pulled out the jacket from under his cloak, and laid it on one of the
asses. mr. anderson followed them on horseback, and i kept as near him
as i could on foot, my horse being loaded. after following them about
three miles, they struck into the woods; and suspecting that they had a
mind to return and steal some of the loads from the fatigued asses in
the rear, i returned with mr. scott, and found that one of the soldiers
had lost his knapsack, and another his jacket. but from their
description, the robbers were not the same as had formerly passed.

continued in the rear. when we came within a mile of the town of
nummaboo, the road passes near some high rocks. the asses being a little
way before us, two of the robbers first seen came from amongst the
rocks, and were going towards the asses; but when they observed us
coming up, they attempted to slide off unobserved among the rocky. when
i called to one of them to stop and tell me what they were looking
after, they came near us; but as they had nothing of ours in their
possession, we could not stop them, and they accordingly passed to the
westward. mr. scott and i went and examined that part of the rocks where
we observed them come out, and were lucky enough to find a soldier's
coat, a camp kettle, and a number of other articles, which had probably
been their share of the booty; for i learned on my arrival at the town,
that the ass which carried the muskets belonging to the sick, had been
stopped by four people near these rocks, and six muskets, a pair of
pistols, and a knapsack taken away. to complete the business, j. bowden,
one of the sick, did not come up; and we had little doubt but that he
had been stripped and murdered by these very people in the woods. we
likewise had a very good ass stolen during the night.

july 19th.--having purchased an ass in lieu of the one stolen, we left
nummaboo, which is a walled village, and proceeded onwards. had two
tornadoes; the last, about eleven o'clock, wetted us much, and made the
road slippery. two asses unable to go on. put their loads on the horses,
and left them. mr. scott's horse unable to walk: left it to our guide.
at noon came to the ruins of a town. found two more of the asses unable
to carry their loads. hired people to carry on the loads, and a boy to
drive the asses. past the ruins of another town at half past twelve,
where i found two of the sick, who had laid themselves down under a
tree, and refused to rise, (they were afterwards stripped by the
negroes, and came naked to our tents next morning). shortly after this,
came to an ass lying on the road unable to proceed with its load. put
part of the load on my horse, which was already heavily loaded. took a
knapsack on my back. the soldier carried the remainder and drove the ass
before him.

we arrived on the banks of the ba woolima at half past one o'clock. this
river is but narrow, not being more than fifty or sixty feet over; but
was so swelled with the rains as to be twenty feet deep at the place
where we proposed to cross it. our first attempt was to fell a tree
close to the river, that by its fall would reach across the stream and
form a bridge: but after cutting down four, they all fell in such a
manner as to be of no use; for though the tops of one reached the rocks
on the farther shore when it fell, yet the violence of the current swept
it away. in this manner we fatigued ourselves till sunset, when we gave
up the attempt.

observed the following emersion of jupiter's satellites.

                                            h.  m.  s.
third satellite emerged by watch  m. s.     9  25  18
  watch too slow                  1  55

first satellite emerged by watch            9  36  10
  watch too slow                  2  34

july 20th.--altitudes taken for the time.

h.  m.  s.   deg.   '      h.  m.  s.    deg.   '
7   6  45   21  21     7    9  42   22  42
0   7  25   21  40     0   10  26   23   2
0   8   8   21  55     0   11   3   23  18

7  13  10   24  18     7   16  27   25  49
0  13  44   24  33     0   17   0   26   3
0  14  14   24  46     0   17  30   26  16

                      deg.   '  "
obser. mer. alt.    166  4  0
                1/2  83  2  0
                      0 16  0
                     83 18  0
                      6 42  0
                     20 43  0

longitude             5  0 13 w.
latitude             14  1  0 n.

the passage of the river being the great desideratum, i proposed a raft
to be hauled from side to side with ropes; whilst the mandingoes were
decidedly of opinion that nothing would answer our purpose but a bridge,
which they said they would complete by two o'clock. i set to work with
the carpenters to make a raft; but when the logs were cut into lengths,
we could not muster healthy people enough to carry them to the water
side. we were forced to give up the attempt and trust entirely to the
negro bridge, which was constructed in the following manner. a straight
pole was cut to sound the depth of the river, and notches made on it to
shew the depth at different distances from the shore. two straight trees
were now cut, and their tops fastened strongly together with slips of
bark. these were launched across the stream with the assistance of two
people, and a rope on the further side; the roots of the trees were
firmly fastened with ropes to the roots of the trees on each side of the
river. along the upper side of these trees they planted a range of
upright forked sticks, cut correctly to the lengths on the sounding
pole. these upright forks supported two other trees tied as the first,
but which were not, like the first, permitted to sink into the water,
but were kept about a foot above the surface by means of the forks.
another range of forks was placed a little farther up the stream, which
likewise supported two trees fastened as the above; the whole was
completed with cross sticks. the two trees first laid over, which were
permitted to sink in the water, served to prevent the stream from
running away with the forks whose roots sloped down the stream; whilst
the weight of the current pressed on and kept firm the roots of such as
were placed up the stream. a section of the bridge would have the
following appearance.

[illustration:
a. trees first laid across.
b. first range of forks.
c. trees supported by first range.
d. second range of forks.
e. trees supported by ditto.
f. cross sticks for walking on.

if the river was dried up, the structure would have somewhat of this
appearance.]

our people being all so sickly, i hired the negroes to carry over all
the baggage, and swim over the asses. our baggage was laid on the rocks
on the east side of the river; but such was our sickly state that we
were unable to carry it up the bank. francis beedle, one of the
soldiers, was evidently dying of the fever; and having in vain
attempted, with the assistance of one of his messmates, to carry him
over, i was forced to leave him on the west bank; thinking it very
probable that he would die in the course of the night.

july 21st.--hired isaaco's people to carry the bundles up the bank, and
assist in loading all the asses. one of the soldiers crossed the bridge,
and found beedle expiring. did not stop to bury him, the sun being high;
but set out immediately. country woody, but level. about half past ten
o'clock came to mr. scott lying by the side of the path, so very sick
that he could not walk. shortly after mr. martyn laid down in the same
state. my horse being loaded, and myself, as usual, walking on foot and
driving an ass, i could give them no assistance. i came in sight of the
town of mareena a little before twelve; and at the same time was happy
to see two of isaaco's people coming back with two asses to take the
loads off the horses in the rear. sent them back for mr. scott and mr.
martyn, and proceeded to the town. some of the people, who had crossed
the river with us, had informed the people of mareena of the treatment
we had experienced in passing from maniakorro to the ba woolima, which
district is called kissi; and withal had told the people that our coffle
was a dummulafong, a thing sent to be eaten, or in english _fair game_
for every body. the inhabitants of mareena were resolved to come in for
their share; they accordingly stole five of our asses during the night;
but felt themselves much disappointed next morning,

july 22d,--when they understood, that instead of proceeding to bangassi,
we proposed to send forward a messenger to inform the king of the bad
treatment we had experienced. three of them returned the asses they had
stolen, but the other two would not. about noon we loaded all the horses
and asses; and i hired two young men to carry forwards two trunks, the
load of one of the asses which was stolen. bangassi is only six miles
distant from mareena. it is a large town, fortified in the same manner
as maniakorro; but is four or five times as large. pitched our tents
under a tree to the east of the town.

july 23d.--received a present from serenummo, the king, of a fine
bullock and two very large calabashes of sweet milk; he likewise sent
the two asses which the people of mareena had stolen. took from our
baggage the following articles, and went with isaaco to the king.

                                 bars.

to the king, amber no. 2          30
            ditto. no. 4          20
      barraloolos                 30
      beads                       30
      looking glasses              5
      balls and flints             2
                               -----
                          bars   117

      mr. anderson's musket.
          ditto sword.
          ditto pistols.

to the king's son, amber no. 4      5
        barraloolo                  5
                               ------
                              bars 10

to the person who assisted in settling the palaver,
   amber                                10
to the good people in the town          10
to isaaco's landlord for a goat         10
                                    ------
                                   bars 30

the town is large and populous, and is better fortified than even
maniakorro. we found serenummo seated in a sort of shade, surrounded by
only a few friends; orders having been given not to allow any person to
enter it. he enquired if i was the white man who had formerly passed
through the country, and what could induce me to come back again; with a
number of such questions. to all which i gave the best answers i could;
and then told him that i did not come to purchase slaves or gold; i did
not come to take any man's trade from him or any man's money; i did not
come to make money, but to spend it; and for the truth of these
assertions i could appeal to every person who knew me or had travelled
with me. i farther added, it was my intention at present to travel
peaceably through his kingdom into bambarra; and that as a mark of my
regard for his name and character, i had brought a few articles which my
guide would present to him. here isaaco spread out on the floor the
articles before mentioned. the king looked at them with that sort of
indifference which an african always affects towards things he has not
before seen. however much he may admire them, he must never appear in
the least surprised. he told me i should have permission to pass; and he
would make his son take care of us till we arrived at sego; but it would
be some days before he was ready. i told him i was anxious to be in
bambarra, as i found my people very sickly; and if he would appoint me a
guide, i would esteem it a favour. in fact i knew before, that this son
proposed going to sego with the annual tribute, which amounts to three
hundred minkallis of gold or thereabouts; but i knew that the gold was
not yet all collected, and that part of it would probably be bought with
the merchandize i had given him.

july 25th.--bought two asses for fifty-six bars of amber. during our
stay at this town we were plentifully supplied with milk on moderate
terms. i always purchased two camp kettles full every morning for the
men, in hopes of recruiting them before we set forwards for the niger;
but they still continue sick and spiritless. corporal _powal_ is
dangerously ill of the fever, and _m'inelli_ is affected with the
dysentery to such a degree, that i have no hopes of his recovery. he was
removed yesterday to the shade of a tree at a small distance from the
tents; and not being brought near in the evening, he was very near being
torn to pieces by the wolves. they were smelling at his feet when he
awakened, and then set up such a horrid howl, that poor m'inelli, sick
as he was, started up and came to the tents before the sentry could
reach the place where he had slept.

july 26th.--corporal powal died during the night. buried him this
morning; two dollars and a half in his pocket, for which i am
accountable. overhauled the ass-saddles, and adjusted the loads,
proposing to leave this to-morrow morning early.

                               deg.    '  "
observed mer. alt. sun       168  26  0
                            ------------
                         1/2  84  13  0
                               0  16  0
                            ------------
                              84  29  0
                            ------------
                   zd.         5  31  0
                   d.         19  31  0
                            ------------
                   latitude   14   0  0
                            ------------

july 27th.--the morning being rainy, we did not depart from bangassi
till about nine o'clock. left here m'inelli. paid the dooty ten bars of
amber to purchase provision for him and give him lodging. shortly after
leaving the town, three of the soldiers laid down under a tree, and
refused to proceed; their names _frair, thomson_, and _hercules_. about
a quarter of a mile farther, james trott, one of the carpenters brought
from portsmouth, refused to go on, being sick of the fever. i drove on
his ass, and desired him to return to bangassi. found myself very sick
and faint, having to drive my horse loaded with rice, and an ass with
the pit saws. came to an eminence, from which i had a view of some very
distant mountains to the east half south. the certainty that the niger
washes the southern base of these mountains made me forget my fever; and
i thought of nothing all the way but how to climb over their blue
summits.

reached nummasoolo at two o'clock. this has formerly been a large town;
but being destroyed by war some years ago, nearly three-fourths of the
town are in ruins. before we had time to pitch the tent properly, the
rain came down on us, and wetted us all completely, both men and
bundles. this was a very serious affair to us, many of our articles of
merchandize being perishable. slept very uncomfortably in wet clothes on
the wet ground. troubled in the night with a lion; he came so near that
the sentry fired at him, but it was so dark that it was impossible to
take a good aim. all the asses pulled up the pins to which they were
fastened, and run together as near the men as they could. as the sick
soldiers before mentioned did not come up before sun-set, i concluded
they had all returned to bangassi; and the dooty's son coming up on
horseback, informed me that they had really returned to his father's
house, and wished to know what i meant to do respecting them. i told him
that i wished my people to be taken proper care of, and gave him ten
bars of amber for his care in coming to inform me of them. i likewise
put into his possession three strings of amber of forty bars each, and
told him how to dispose of them for the use of the sick. i likewise told
him that, if any of them should recover, if he would send a proper
person forward with them to bambakoo, i would give him an indian baft,
or ten bars of scarlet, which he preferred. at the same time i wrote the
following note to the men.


"dear soldiers,

"i am sorry to learn that you have returned to bangassi. i have sent in
charge of the bearer of this three complete strings of amber; one of
which will procure rice for forty days; the second will purchase milk or
fowls for the same time; and the third will buy provisions for you on
the road till you arrive at the niger.

"your's

"m. park."


july 28th.--rained all day. remained in the tent at nummasoolo.

july 29.--divided the men's clothes who were left behind amongst the
other men; many of them being in great want of clothes, and the nights
being now cold and damp. found five dollars in j. trott's knapsack, for
which i am accountable. spread out the rice to dry; found it hot and
much damaged. some people arrived from the east, who informed us that a
stream on the road, which is usually dry, was so much swelled by the
rain that no ass could cross it. halted here during the day to dry the
different articles.

july 30th.--departed from nummasoolo. was under the necessity of leaving
here william allen sick. paid the dooty for him as usual. i regretted
much leaving this man; he had naturally a cheerful disposition; and he
used often to beguile the watches of the night with the songs of our
dear native land.

about five miles east of nummasoolo passed the stream before mentioned,
flowing to the s.e. the water had subsided, and was only about eighteen
inches deep, but flowed very rapidly. many asses fell, and had their
loads wetted. it likewise rained two hours on the march. crossed a ridge
of hills through an opening. road tolerably good except in two places.
we descended on the east side, and reached surtaboo, a small ruined
village, about two o'clock. here i learnt that the front of the coffle
had gone on to a village about four miles further; but the asses in the
rear being all very much fatigued, and lying down with their loads
frequently, i judged it prudent to halt till some fresh asses should be
sent to my assistance.

we had not halted here above an hour, when three of isaaco's people and
two asses came back; and with their help we arrived at _sobee_ at seven
o'clock. on the road we passed the _last_ of the st. jago asses, the
whole forty having either died or been abandoned on the road at
different places. we were all very wet, for it rained almost the whole
way; and all very hungry, having tasted nothing since the preceding
evening. the town of _sobee_ has changed its situation _three_ times. it
was taken about ten years ago by daisy, king of kaarta, with thirteen
horsemen and some of his slaves on foot. they carried off five hundred
slaves, two hundred of which were women. such as escaped rebuilt the
town about a mile to the east of its former situation; but when it had
acquired some degree of prosperity, it was destroyed by mansong, king of
bambarra. the present town is built nearer the foot of the hills; part
of it is walled, which serves as a sort of citadel. there is plenty of
corn and rice here on moderate terms; but they have not yet had time to
recruit their herds of cattle.

july 31st.--rained hard all the morning, and flying showers all day.
halted at _sobee_. during the night one of the town's-people attempted
to steal one of the soldier's pieces, some of which were standing
against a tree close to the tent. lieutenant martyn was sleeping under
the tree; and hearing somebody moving the muskets, he no sooner observed
that it was a negro, than he snatched one of the muskets and fired at
the thief as he was running off with one of the muskets. whether the
ball touched him or not we could not learn; but the thief dropped the
musket, and we found it with the pouch and bayonet in the morning.

august 1st.--early this morning purchased an ass for a pistol, a baft,
and a mandingo cloth. we set out at seven o'clock. immediately on the
east of the town came to another stream flowing towards the s.s.w. it
was so deep, that the whole of the bundles had to be carried over on
men's heads. during this, being surrounded by thieves on all sides,
isaaco unfortunately struck two of the soldiers; which action had nearly
cost him his life, one of the soldiers attempting to stab him with his
bayonet, when mr. anderson prevented him; and as i reproved isaaco for
his conduct in the sharpest manner, he went off in a _pet_ with his
people, leaving us to find our way across the river in the best manner
we could. i hired four people to carry over the loads; and stood myself
as sentry over the thieves. in this manner the whole of the baggage was
carried over with much less loss than we had sustained at any other
river. the asses were swam over, and the whole only cost one string of
no. 5; but i had to pay fifty stones to the dooty's son for asses going
on the corn. as soon as all was over we loaded the asses and set
forwards. at sunset we reached _balanding_. we had only time to pitch
our tent, when the rain came on; indeed we had no time for cooking our
victuals, for though all the soldiers cooked, yet the rain came on
before our kettle was ready; and messrs. anderson, scott, martyn, and
myself, all slept without having tasted any thing during the day.

august 2d.--rainy. halted at balanding.

august 3d.--sun rose e. 3 deg.s. departed from balanding, and halted at
balandoo, a walled village about four miles to the east by south. bought
two sheep for one barraloolo.

august 4th.--departed from balandoo. about a mile to the east saw the
hill of sobee bearing n.w. by compass. about this place lawrence cahill,
one of the soldiers, who had complained of sickness for some days, fell
behind; and i hired a person to drive his ass, telling him to come on at
his leisure. at eleven o'clock crossed a stream running s.e. which gave
us great trouble, the banks being very steep and slippery. crossed the
same stream again at half past twelve, running e. by n. in the course of
this day's march four of the soldiers were unable to attend to their
asses. mr. scott, being very sick, rode my horse; and i drove one of the
asses. so very much weakened were the men, that when their loads fell
off, they could not lift them on again. i assisted in loading thirteen
asses in the course of the march. we reached koolihori at three o'clock.
this town is partly walled; but the greater part of the huts are without
the walls. as soon as the tents were pitched, the rain commenced, and
continued all night. we had not time to cook, and the rain prevented the
watch fire from burning; owing to which one of our asses was killed by
the wolves. it was only sixteen feet distant from a bush under which one
of the men was sleeping.

august 5th.--morning hazy. halted, resolving to travel at two o'clock,
and sleep in the woods, the ba woolli being too far to reach in one
march. bought some ripe maize of this year's growth.

                           deg.  '  "
obser. mer. alt. sun--  172 45  0
                        ---------
                         86 22  0-1/2
                          0 16  0
                        ---------
                         86 38  0-1/2
                        ---------
                          3 22  0
                         17  3  0
                        ---------
latitude--               13 41  0

the whole route from bangassi is marked with ruined towns and villages;
some of them are rebuilt, but by far the greater number are still in
ruins. we saw scarcely any cattle on the route, and the avidity of the
people of koolihori for animal food, or perhaps their own peculiar
taste, made them eat what the wolves had left of our ass. the wolves had
eat only the bowels and heart, &c. so that the people had the four
quarters and head. the day having clouded up for rain, resolved to halt
here for the night. in the course of the afternoon lawrence cahill came
up; but william hall, who had gone into a ruined hut near the road, and
who did not appear to be very sick, did not arrive. suspected that he
might be killed by the wolves in the hut during the night. at sun-set
had all the asses properly tied near the tents; and watched myself with
the sentries all night, as the wolves kept constantly howling round us.




chapter v.

departure from koolihori--ganifarra--scarcity of provisions--distressing
situation of the author from deaths and sickness of the party--escapes
from three lions--intricate route to koomikoomi--dombila--visit from
karfa taura--view of the niger--reduced state of the party--bambakoo--
losses from wolves--bosradoo; embark on the niger; incidents in the
voyage to marraboo--isaaco sent to sego with presents for mansong--
message from mansong--course to koolikorro--deena--yamina--samee--
return of isaaco; account of his interview with mansong--messengers
sent by mansong, and enquiries respecting the author's journey--quit
samee--excessive heat--reach sansanding--account of that city and its
trade--death of mr. anderson--preparations for continuing the voyage
eastward--information collected respecting various districts.




chapter v.


august 6th.--having hired two more ass drivers at one bar and their
victuals per day, we left koolihori early in the morning, and travelled
with considerable dispatch till three o'clock; at which time we reached
ganifarra, a small beggarly village. in the course of this march _l.
cakill_ and _j. bird_, two of the soldiers, and _william cox_, one of
the seamen, fell behind, and laid down. as soon as the front of the
coffle had reached ganifarra, it came on a very heavy rain. being in the
rear i was completely drenched; and two of the asses carrying four
trunks, in which were the gun stocks, pistols, looking glasses, &c. fell
down in a stream of water near the town, and all the contents were
completely wet. i could purchase nothing here, not so much as a fowl.
served out a short allowance of rice, being very short of that article.

august 7th.--during the night, some person had stolen one of our best
asses; and as the load must be left if we could not recover it, isaaco's
people having traced the foot marks to a considerable distance, agreed
to go in search of it. isaaco gave them the strictest orders, if they
came up to the thief in the woods to shoot him; and, if not, to follow
him to a town and demand the ass from the dooty; if he refused to give
it up, to return as soon as possible.

spent the day in drying such things as were wet; cleaned and greased
with shea butter all the ornamented pistols, _ten pair_. dried the
looking glasses, which were quite spoiled. in the afternoon sent two of
the natives away with goods to a neighbouring town to purchase rice and
corn. at sun-set _bird_ came up, but had seen nothing of _cox_ nor
_cahill_.

august 8th.--people not yet returned. opened the trunk which contained
the double barrelled gun stocks; cleaned and greased them. about noon
people returned with the rice and corn, but not quite sufficient for one
day. nearly at the same time isaaco's people came up with the ass; they
had traced his foot-marks past koolihori, and found him at balandoo. did
not see the thief, but learned his name; which isaaco promised to write
to his friend at bangassi, to inform serinummo of him. in the afternoon
agreed with the dooty for thirty five bars to carry every thing over.
rained heavily all the evening.

august 9th.--michael may, a soldier, having died during the night,
buried him at day break. had all the loads taken to the crossing place
by eight o'clock. the ba woolli is nearly of the same size as the one we
formerly crossed of that name; it appeared to be exceedingly deep, and
flowed at the rate of four or five miles per hour. there is a very good
canoe here, which can carry over four ass loads at once. as it
threatened rain, sent over three men with one of the tents, and pitched
it on the east side about half a mile from the river; the ground near
the bank being marshy. hired people to carry down the bundles, and put
them into the canoe; and others to receive them on the other side, and
carry them up the bank; so that the soldiers had nothing to move, being
all weak and sickly.

by one o'clock all the baggage was over; but we found some difficulty in
transporting the asses; the rapidity of the stream swept the canoe and
the first six past the landing place; and they went so far down the
river, that i really thought the asses must be drowned; which would have
been an irreparable loss in our situation. however, by the exertions of
the negroes, who swam in with ropes to the canoe, the asses were landed
on the other side; where they stood by the water's edge until the
negroes with their corn hoes made a path for them up the steep bank. to
prevent such an accident, we took the ropes from several of our loads,
and fastened them together, so as to reach across the river; with this
we hauled over the loaded canoe, and the negroes paddled it back when
empty. in this manner all the asses and horses were swam over without
any loss.

when the bundles were all carried up to the tent, we found that we had
not more rice than was barely sufficient for the present day; and as no
more could be purchased, we had no alternative, but to march early in
the morning for bambarra; the distance by all accounts would not exceed
fourteen or fifteen miles.

august 10th.--william ashton declared that he was unable to travel; but
as there was no place to leave him at, i advised him to make an exertion
and come on, though slowly, till he should reach a place where he could
have food. at eight o'clock set forwards; and travelled very
expeditiously without halting till four in the afternoon, at which time
the front of the coffle reached _dababoo_, a village of bambarra. being
in the rear, i found many of the men very much fatigued with the length
of the journey and the heat of the day. at half past four i arrived with
the ass i drove at a stream flowing to the westwards.

here i found many of the soldiers sitting, and mr. anderson lying under
a bush, apparently dying. took him on my back, and carried him across
the stream, which came up to my middle. carried over the load of the ass
which i drove, got over the ass, mr. anderson's horse, &c. found myself
much fatigued, having crossed the stream sixteen times. left here four
soldiers with their asses, being unable to carry over their loads.
having loaded my ass and put mr. anderson on his horse, we went on to
the village; but was sorry to find that no rice could be had, and i was
only able to buy one solitary fowl.

august 11th.--bought a small bullock of the moorish breed for one
barraloolo; and having purchased some corn, had it cleaned and dressed
for the people instead of rice. this morning hired isaaco's people to go
back, and bring up the loads of the soldiers who had halted by the side
of the stream. in the course of the day all the loads arrived; but was
sorry to find that in the course of the last two marches we had lost
_four men_, viz. _cox_, _cahill_, _bird_, and _ashton_. mr. anderson
still in a very dangerous way, being unable to walk or sit upright. mr.
scott much recovered. i found that i must here leave one load, one of
the horses being quite finished. left the _seine nets_ in charge of the
dooty, till i should send for them.

august 12th.--rained all the morning. about eleven o'clock, the sky
being clear, loaded the asses. none of the europeans being able to lift
a load, isaaco made the negroes load the whole. saddled mr. anderson's
horse; and having put a sick soldier on mine, took mr. anderson's horse
by the bridle, that he might have no trouble but sitting upright on the
saddle. we had not gone far before i found one of the asses with a load
of gunpowder, the driver (dickinson) being unable to proceed (i never
heard of him afterwards); and shortly after the sick man dismounted from
my horse, and laid down by a small pool of water, refusing to rise.
drove the ass and horse on before me. passed a number of sick. at half
past twelve o'clock mr. anderson declared he could ride no farther. took
him down and laid him in the shade of a bush, and sat down beside him.
at half past two o'clock he made another attempt to proceed; but had not
rode above an hundred yards before i had to take him down from the
saddle, and lay him again in the shade. i now gave up all thoughts of
being able to carry him forwards till the cool of the evening; and
having turned the horses and ass to feed, i sat down to watch the
pulsations of my dying friend. at four o'clock four of the sick came up;
three of them agreed to take charge of the ass with the gunpowder; and i
put a fourth, who had a sore leg, on my horse, telling him if he saw mr.
scott on the road to give him the horse.

at half past five o'clock, there being a fine breeze from the south
west; mr. anderson agreed to make another attempt, and having again
placed him on the saddle, i led the horse on pretty smartly in hopes of
reaching koomikoomi before dark. we had not proceeded above a mile,
before we heard on our left a noise very much like the barking of a
large mastiff, but ending in a hiss like the fuf [footnote: thus is mr.
park's ms] of a cat. i thought it must be some large monkey; and was
observing to mr. anderson "what a bouncing fellow that must be," when we
heard another bark nearer to us, and presently a third still nearer,
accompanied with a growl. i now suspected that some wild animal meant to
attack us, but could not conjecture of what species it was likely to be.
we had not proceeded an hundred yards farther, when coming to an opening
in the bushes, i was not a little surprised to see three lions coming
towards us. they were not so red as the lion i formerly saw in
barnbarra, [footnote: park's travels, p. 208] but of a dusky colour,
like the colour of an ass. they were very large, and came bounding over
the long grass, not one after another, but all abreast of each other. i
was afraid, if i allowed them to come too near us, and my piece should
miss fire, that we should be all devoured by them. i therefore let go
the bridle, and walked forwards to meet them. as soon as they were
within a long shot of me, i fired at the centre one. i do not think i
hit him; but they all stopt, looked at each other, and then bounded away
a few paces, when one of them stopt, and looked back at me. i was too
busy in loading my piece to observe their motions as they went away, and
was very happy to see the last of them march slowly off amongst the
bushes. we had not proceeded above half a mile farther, when we heard
another bark and growl close to us amongst the bushes. this was
doubtless one of the lions before seen, and i was afraid they would
follow us till dark, when they would have too many opportunities of
springing on us unawares. i therefore got mr. anderson's call, and made
as loud a whistling and noise as possible. we heard no more of them.

just at dark we descended into a valley where was a small stream of
water; but the ascent on the opposite side was through a species of
broken ground, which i have never seen any where but in africa. it is of
the following nature. a stratum of stiff yellow clay fourteen or twenty
feet thick, (which, unless when it rains, is as hard as rock) is washed
by the annual rains into fissures of a depth equal to the thickness of
the stratum. there is no vegetation on these places, except on the
summit or original level. amongst these horrid gullies i unfortunately
lost sight of the footmarks of the asses which had gone before; and
finding no way to get out, led the horse up a very steep place in order
to gain the original level, hoping there to find the foot path. but
unluckily the ground was all broken as far as i could see; and after
travelling some little way, we came to a gulley which we could not
cross; and finding no possibility of moving without the danger of being
killed by falling into some of these ravines, or over some precipice, i
thought it advisable to halt till the morning. on this rugged summit we
fell in with jonas watkins, one of the sick; and with his assistance i
lighted a fire. wrapped mr. anderson in his cloak, and laid him down
beside it. watched all night to keep the fire burning, and prevent our
being surprised by the lions, which we knew were at no great distance.
about two o'clock in the morning two more of the sick joined us. mr.
anderson slept well during the night, and as soon as day dawned,

august 13th,--having found the footmarks of the asses, and having with
difficulty even in day light traced our way through this labyrinth, we
found mr. scott and three more of the sick. they too had lost their way,
and had slept about half a mile to the east of us. we reached koomikoomi
at ten o'clock. this is an unwalled village, but surrounded with
extensive corn fields.

august 13th.--halted; rested at koomikoomi

august 14th.--jonas watkins died this morning; buried him. halted here
to day to see which way mr. anderson's fever was likely to terminate;
and in the mean time sent two loaded asses forward to doombila, the
asses to return in the evening and carry loads to-morrow morning.

                             deg.    '   "
obser. mer. alt. ---- ---- 177   7   0
                             0  32   0
                           ------------
                           177  39   0
                           ------------
                            88  49   0-1/2
                           -------------
                 z d. ----   1  11   0
                   d.       14   8   0
                           -------------
             latitude ----  12  57   0 [*]
                           -------------

[footnote *: mr. park took a wrong day's declination, i.e. the 15th
instead of the 14th. it should be,

                             deg.    '    "
              zd. ---- ----  1   11    0
             dec. ---- ---- 14   27   29
                           ---------------
         latitude ---- ---- 13   16   29
                           ---------------
]

it is a common observation of the negroes, that when the indian corn is
in blossom the rain stops for eleven days. the stopping of the rain
evidently depends on the sun approaching the zenith of the place; the
sun by this day's observation being only seventy-one miles north of us:
and it is a wonderful institution of providence, that at this time the
maize here is all in full blossom; and on passing through the fields,
one is like to be blinded with the pollen of the male flowers.

august 15th.--having slung a cloak like a hammock under a straight
stick, had mr. anderson put into it, and carried on two men's heads: two
more following to relieve them. mr. scott complained this morning of
sickness and head ach. made one of the soldiers saddle mr. anderson's
horse for him; and having seen him mount, and given him his canteen with
water, i rode forwards to look after four negroes whom i had hired to
carry loads on their heads; but being strangers, i was apprehensive they
might run away with them. found every thing going on well; and we
travelled with such expedition, that we reached doombila in four hours
and a half, though the distance cannot be less than sixteen or eighteen
miles, nearly south. it rained hard all the afternoon, and it was not
till dark that all the sick soldiers came up. only three of the soldiers
were able to drive their asses to day.

when i entered the town i was happy to meet _karfa taura_, [footnote:
park's travels, p. 253.] the worthy negro mentioned in my former
travels; he heard a report at _boori_ (where he now resides) that a
coffle of white people were passing through fooladoo for bambarra; and
that they were conducted by a person of the name of park, who spoke
mandingo. he heard this report in the evening; and in the morning he
left his house, determined if possible to meet me at bambakoo, a
distance of six days travel. he came to bambakoo with three of his
slaves to assist me in going forward to sego, but when he found i had
not come up, he came forwards to meet me. he instantly recognised me,
and you may judge of the pleasure i felt on seeing my old benefactor.

at four o'clock, as mr. scott had not come up, and the people in the
rear had not seen him lately, i sent one of isaaco's people back on my
horse as far as the next village, suspecting that he might have halted
there when the rain came on. the man returned after dark, having been
nearly at koomikoomi without seeing or hearing any thing of mr. scott.
we all concluded that he had returned to koomikoomi.

august 17th--halted at doombila in order to dry the baggage, and in
hopes of mr. scott coming up. told the four negroes, who carried mr.
anderson, and who returned to koomikoomi this morning, to make every
possible enquiry concerning mr. scott; and if he was able to ride, i
would pay them handsomely for coming with him. if he had returned to
koomikoomi, i desired them to assure the dooty that i would pay for
every expence he might incur, and pay for a guide to conduct him to
marraboo. received from the dooty of doombila a small bullock and a
sheep. paid him a barraloolo, five bars of amber, and fifty gun flints.

august 18th.--hearing no account of mr. scott, concluded he was still at
koomikoomi, but unable to travel. at seven o'clock left doombila, and as
the asses were now very weak, it was not long before i had to dismount
and put a load on my horse. only one of the soldiers able to drive an
ass. road very bad; did not reach _toniba_ till sun set, being a
distance of eighteen or twenty miles s.e. by s. mr. anderson's bearers
halted with him at a village on the road, where there was some good
beer. as soon as we had pitched the tent, it began to rain, and rained
all night; the soldiers run all into the village. i passed a very
disagreeable night, having to keep our asses from eating the people's
corn, which caused me to keep walking about almost the whole night.

in case it should escape my memory, i take this opportunity of
observing, that the standard law of africa runs thus: if an ass should
break a single stem of corn, the proprietor of the corn has a right to
seize the ass; and if the owner of the ass will not satisfy him for the
damage he thinks he has sustained, he can _retain_ the ass. he cannot
_sell_ or _work_ him, but he can _kill_ him; and as the bambarrans
esteem ass-flesh as a great luxury, this part of the law is often put in
force.

august 19th.--mr. anderson's bearers having brought him forward early in
the morning, we immediately loaded the asses, and departed from toniba
(sergeant mckeal appears to be slightly delirious). we kept ascending
the mountains to the south of toniba till three o'clock, at which time
having gained the summit of the ridge which separates the niger from the
remote branches of the senegal, i went on a little before; and coming to
the brow of the hill, i _once more saw the niger_ rolling its immense
stream along the plain!

after the fatiguing march which we had experienced, the sight of this
river was no doubt pleasant, as it promised an end to, or to be at least
an alleviation of our toils. but when i reflected that three-fourths of
the soldiers had died on their march, and that in addition to our weakly
state we had no carpenters to build the boats, in which we proposed to
prosecute our discoveries; the prospect appeared somewhat gloomy. it
however afforded me peculiar pleasure, when i reflected that in
conducting a party of _europeans_, with immense baggage, through an
extent of more than five hundred miles, i had always been able to
preserve the most friendly terms with the natives. in fact, this journey
plainly demonstrates, 1st. that with common prudence any quantity of
merchandize may be transported from the gambia to the niger, without
danger of being robbed by the natives: 2dly, that if this journey be
performed in the dry season, one may calculate on losing not more than
three or at most four men out of fifty.

but to return to the niger. the river was much swelled by the rains, but
did not appear to overflow its banks. it certainly is larger even here
than either the senegal or the gambia. we descended with difficulty down
the steep side of the hill towards bambakoo, which place we reached at
half past six o'clock, and pitched our tents under a tree near the town.
of thirty-four soldiers and four carpenters, who left the gambia, only
six soldiers and one carpenter reached the niger.

during the night the wolves carried away two large cloth bundles from
the tent door to a considerable distance; where they eat off the skins
with which they were covered, and left them.

august 20th--received a bullock from the dooty as a present. it was in
the afternoon, and we fastened it to the tree close to the tent, where
all the asses were tied. as soon as it was dark the wolves tore its
bowels out, though within ten yards of the tent door where we were all
sitting. the wolves here are the largest and most ferocious we have yet
seen.

august 21st.--dried a bundle of beads, the strings of which were all
rotten with the rain. opened a leather bag which contained about thirty
pounds of gunpowder for present use. found it all wet and damaged.
spread it out in the sun; resolved to make something of it. spoke for a
canoe to carry down the baggage to marraboo, the river being navigable
over the rapids at this season. in the course of our march from toniba
to bambakoo, we lost sergeant _mckeil_, _purvey_, and _samuel hill_.

august 22nd.--early in the morning had all the bundles put on the asses,
and carried to the place of embarkation, which is a village called
bossradoo, about a mile and a half east of bambakoo. it rained hard all
the forenoon. the canoes could not carry any of the soldiers, or any
person except two to look after the goods. i resolved to go down with
mr. anderson, leaving mr. martyn to come down with the men by land. they
rode on the asses.

we embarked at ten minutes past three o'clock. the current, which is
nearly five knots per hour, set us along without the trouble of rowing
any more than was necessary to keep the canoe in the proper course. the
river is full an english mile over, and at the rapids it is spread out
to nearly twice that breadth. the rapids seem to be formed by the river
passing through a ridge of hills in a south easterly direction: they are
very numerous, and correspond with the jetting angles of the hills.
there are _three_ principal ones, where the water breaks with
considerable noise in the middle of the river; but the canoe men easily
avoided them by paddling down one of the branches near the shore. even
in this manner the velocity was such as to make me sigh.

we passed two of the principal rapids, and three smaller ones, in the
course of the afternoon. we saw on one of the islands, in the middle of
the river, a large elephant; it was of a red clay colour with black
legs. i was very unwell of the dysentery; otherwise i would have had a
shot at him, for he was quite near us. we saw three hippopotami close to
another of these islands. the canoe men were afraid they might follow us
and overset the canoes. the report of a musket will in all cases
frighten them away. they blow up the water exactly like a whale. as we
were gliding along shore, one of the canoe men speared a fine turtle, of
the same species as the one i formerly saw, and made a drawing of in
gambia. at sun set we rowed to the shore, landed on some flat rocks, and
set about cooking the turtle and rice for our supper; but before this
aldermanic repast was half dressed, the rain came on us, and continued
with great violence all night.

august 23d.--at day break embarked again, very wet and sleepy. passed
the third rapid, and arrived at marraboo at nine o'clock. our guide soon
found a large passage hut in which to deposit our baggage, for one stone
of small amber per load. we carried the whole of it up in a few minutes.
in the evening mr. martyn arrived, and all the people, except two, who
came up next day.

august 24th.--received from the dooty a small black bullock in a
present, which our guide would not allow us to kill, it being of a jet
black colour. the dooty's name is sokee; and so superstitious was he,
that all the time we remained at marraboo he kept himself in his hut,
conceiving that if he saw a white man, he would never prosper after.

august 25th--paid isaaco goods to the full value of two prime slaves,
according to agreement. i likewise gave him several articles; and i told
him, that when the palaver was adjusted at sego, he should then have all
the asses and horses for his trouble.

august 26th.--took out such things as i meant to give to mansong, viz.

a handsome silver plated tureen.
*two double barrelled guns, silver mounted.
two pair of pistols mounted in the same manner.
a sabre with morocco scabbard.
thirty-two yards scarlet broad cloth.
twelve ditto blue.
twelve ditto yellow.
twelve ditto light green.
*half a load of gunpowder, or two kegs and a half.

   to mansong's eldest son da.

*a double barrelled gun, silver mounted.
a pair of pistols, ditto.
a sabre, ditto.

i wished to put a stop to the malicious reports of the moors and
mahomedans at sego as soon as possible. i therefore resolved to send
isaaco forward to sego with all the articles beforementioned, except
those marked thus [symbol: *], which i desired him to say to modibinne
would be given as soon as i heard accounts that mansong would befriend
us. this modibinne is mansong's prime minister; he is a mahomedan, but
not intolerant in his principles. isaaco accordingly departed on the
28th with his wife and all his goods. ever since my arrival at marraboo
i had been subject to attacks of the dysentery; and as i found that my
strength was failing very fast, i resolved to charge myself with
mercury. i accordingly took calomel till it affected my mouth to such a
degree, that i could not speak or sleep for six days. the salivation put
an immediate stop to the dysentery, which had proved fatal to so many of
the soldiers. on the 2d of september, i observed the

                           deg.  '  "
mer. alt. of the sun--  169 54  0
                        ---------
                         84 57  0
                          0 16  0
                        ---------
                         85 13  0
                        ---------
                          4 47  0
                          8  1  0
                        ---------
marraboo latitude--      12 48  0

as soon as i recovered, i set about exchanging some amber and coral for
cowries, which are the current money of bambarra.

                        cowries.
coral no. 4 each stone     60
amber no. 5                60
blue agates per string    100

with these three articles i bought about twenty thousand cowries. it is
curious that in counting the cowries, they call eighty a hundred; whilst
in all other things they calculate by the common hundred. sixty is
called a manding hundred.

on the 6th thomas dyer (a private) died of the fever. i had to pay one
thousand shells to dooty sokee, before he would allow me to bury him;
alleging that if the ground was not bought where he was buried, it would
never grow good corn after.

there is no wood proper for boat building in this neighbourhood; the
best wood is near kankaree, on a large navigable branch of the niger;
and almost all the bambarra canoes come from thence; many of them are
mahogany.

the travellers from sego brought us every day some unfavourable news or
other. at one time it was reported, and believed all over marraboo, that
mansong had killed isaaco with his own hand, and would do the same with
all the whites who should come into bambarra. our fears were at length
dispelled by the arrival of bookari, mansong's singing man, on the 8th,
with six canoes. he told us he came by mansong's orders to convey us and
our baggage to sego. that mansong thought highly of the presents which
isaaco had brought, and wished us to be brought to sego before he
received them from isaaco. we accordingly put our baggage in order; but
it was not till the 12th that the singing man and his _somonies_ (canoe
people) could be prevailed on to leave the dooty _sokee's_ good beef,
and beer. we embarked, and left marraboo at ten minutes past three
o'clock.

time. course.    objects.                 bearing.   distance.

3.10  e. 1/2 n.  the north extreme        e.
                   of the south hills.
                 little hump on           e.s.e.
                   south hills.
                 cubic hill on north      e. by n.   distant 12
                  side.                              or 14 miles.

0 25  e. by n.
0 30  e. n. e.
0 45  e. 1/2 s.
4  0  e.
0 45  e. by n. 1/2 w.
5  0  n. e.      cubic hill.              n.         distant 1/4 of
0 10             halted for the                      a mile.
                   night at koolikorro

september 13th.--bookari sent four of the somonies over to a town on the
opposite side of the river, to put in requisition a canoe for carrying
part of our baggage. the people refused to give the canoe, and sent the
somonies back without it. bookari immediately went with all the somonies
(38); and having cut the owner of the canoe across the forehead with his
sword, and broke his brother's head with a canoe paddle, he seized one
of his sons, and brought him away as a slave along with the canoe. he
however set the boy at liberty, his father paying two thousand shells
for his release.

we left koolikorro at thirty-five minutes past eleven. i will not
trouble your lordship with transcribing the courses and compass bearings
from this to sansanding. the latitude of the places will give a
sufficient idea of the course of the river; and i hope to give a
tolerable correct chart of all its turnings and widings, when i return
to great britain.

                               deg.  '  "
observed mer. alt. sun.--    80 45  0
                              0 16  0
                             --------
                             81  1  0
                             --------
                    zd.--     8 59  0 n
                     d.--     3 53  0
                             --------
koolikorro     latitude--    12 52  0 n
                             --------

_the horizon_ was an oblique view across the river. distance of the land
seven miles; height of the eye sixteen inches above the surface of the
water.

we travelled very pleasantly all day; in fact nothing can be more
beautiful than the views of this immense river; sometimes as smooth as a
mirror, at other times ruffled with a gentle breeze, but at all times
sweeping us along at the rate of six or seven miles per hour. we halted
for the night at deena, a somoni village on the south side. had a
tornado in the night, which wetted our baggage much. most of us slept in
the canoes to prevent theft.

september 14th.--departed from deena early in the morning, and arrived
at yamina at forty-five minutes past four o'clock. halted here the 15th,
in order to purchase cowries.

                          deg.  ' "
observ. alt. sun--      79 63 0
                         0 16 0
                        -------
                        79 52 0
                        -------
                        10  8 0
                         3  7 0
                        -------
yamina    latitude--    13 15 0

on the 16th left yamina, and in the evening reached samee, where we
landed our baggage; and bookari went forward to sego to inform mansong
of our arrival.

september 17th.--
                            deg.  ' "
obser. mer. alt. sun--    78 47 0
                           0 16 0
                          -------
                           79 3 0
                          -------
                          10 57 0
                           2 20 0
                          -------
samee       latitude--    13 17 0
                          -------

september 18th.--no accounts from sego.

september 19th.--about two o'clock in the morning, isaaco arrived in a
canoe from sego, with all the articles i had sent to mansong. mansong
had never yet seen any of them; and when he heard that i was arrived at
samee, he desired modibinne to inform isaaco that he had best take the
articles up to samee; and he would send a person to receive them from my
own hand. isaaco informed me that mansong, at all the interviews he had
with him, uniformly declared that he would allow us to pass; but
whenever isaaco mentioned us particularly, or related any incident that
had happened on the journey, mansong immediately began to make squares
and triangles in the sand before him with his finger, and continued to
do so, so long as isaaco spoke about us. isaaco said, that he thought
mansong was rather afraid of us; particularly as he never once expressed
a wish to see us, but rather the contrary.

september 22d.--in the evening, modibinne and four more of mansong's
friends arrived in a canoe. they sent for me, and modibinne told me,
that they were come by mansong's orders to hear, from my own mouth, what
had brought me into bambarra. he said i might think on it during the
night, and they would visit me in the morning; he said mansong had sent
me a bullock, which he shewed me: it was very fat, and _milk white_.

september 23d.--as soon as we had breakfasted, modibinne and the four
grandees came to visit us. when they had seated themselves, and the
usual compliments passed, modibinne desired me to acquaint them with the
motives which had induced me to come into their country. i spoke to them
in the bambarra language as follows. "i am the white man who nine years
ago came into bambarra. i then came to sego, and requested mansong's
permission to pass to the eastwards; he not only permitted me to pass,
but presented me with five thousand cowries to purchase provisions on
the road; [footnote: park's travels, p. 199.] for you all know that the
moors had robbed me of my goods. this generous conduct of mansong
towards me, has made his name much respected in the land of the white
people. the king of that country has sent me again into bambarra; and if
mansong is inclined to protect me, and you who are here sitting, wish to
befriend me, i will inform you of the real object of my coming into your
country."

(here modibinne desired me to speak on, as they were all my friends),
"you all know that the white people are a trading people; and that all
the articles of value, which the moors and the people of jinnie bring to
sego, are made by us. if you speak of a _good gun_, who made it? the
_white people_. if you speak of a good pistol or sword, or piece of
scarlet or baft, or beads or gunpowder, who made them? the _white
people_. we sell them to the moors; the moors bring them to tombuctoo,
where they sell them at a _higher rate_. the people of tombuctoo sell
them to the people of jinnie at a still higher price; and the people of
jinnie sell them to you. now the king of the white people wishes to find
out a way by which we may bring our own merchandize to you, and sell
every thing at a much cheaper rate than you now have them. for this
purpose, if mansong will permit me to pass, i propose sailing down the
joliba to the place where it mixes with the salt water; and if i find no
rocks or danger in the way, the white men's small vessels will come up
and trade at sego, if mansong wishes it. what i have now spoken, i hope
and trust you will not mention to any person, except mansong and his
son; for if the moors should hear of it, i shall certainly be murdered
before i reach the salt water."

modibinne answered, "we have heard what you have spoken. your journey is
a good one, and may god prosper you in it; mansong will protect you. we
will carry your words to mansong this afternoon; and tomorrow we will
bring you his answer." i made isaaco shew them the different things,
which i had allotted for mansong and his son. they were delighted with
the tureen, the double-barrelled guns, and in fact every thing was far
superior to any thing of the kind they had ever before seen.

when i had laid out every thing for mansong and his son, i then made
each of the grandees, and modibinne, a present of scarlet cloth.
modibinne now said that they had seen what i laid out for mansong and
his son, and that the present was great, and worthy of mansong; but,
added he, mansong has heard so many reports concerning your baggage,
that he wishes us to examine it. "such of the bundles as are covered
with skin, we will not open; you will tell us what is in them, and that
will be sufficient." i told them that i had nothing but what was
necessary for purchasing provisions; and that it would please me much if
they could dispense with opening the bundles. they however persisted;
and i ordered the bundles to be brought out, taking care, with the
assistance of the soldiers, to secrete all the good amber and coral.

when all the loads were inspected, i asked modibinne what he thought of
my baggage? if he had seen any more silver tureens, or double barrelled
guns? he said he had seen nothing that was _bad_, and nothing but what
was necessary for purchasing provisions; that he would report the same
to mansong. they accordingly went away to sego; but without taking
mansong's present, till they had heard his answer.

september 24th.--_seed_ and _barber_ (soldiers) died during the night;
one of the fever, the other of the dysentery. paid the somonies twenty
stones of amber for burying them.

september 25th.--modibinne and the same people returned with mansong's
answer, a literal translation of which i give as follows. "mansong says
he will protect you; that a road is open for you every where, as far as
his hand (power) extends. if you wish to go to the east, no man shall
harm you from sego till you pass tombuctoo. if you wish to go to the
west, you may travel through fooladoo and manding, through kasson and
bondou; the name of mansong's stranger will be a sufficient protection
for you. if you wish to build your boats at samee or sego, at sansanding
or jinnie, name the town, and mansong will convey you thither." he
concluded by observing, that mansong wished me to sell him four of the
_blunderbusses_, _three swords_, _a fiddle_ (violin) which belonged to
mr. scott, and some _birmingham bead necklaces_, which pleased above
every thing; that he had sent us a bullock, and his son another, with a
fine sheep. i told modibinne that mansong's friendship was of more value
to me than the articles he had mentioned, and that i would be happy if
mansong would accept them from me as a farther proof of my esteem.

i made choice of sansanding for fitting out our canoe, because mansong
had never said he wished to see me, and because i could live quieter and
freer from begging than at sego. i therefore sent down the bullocks by
land to sansanding.

september 26th. we departed from samee. the canoes were not covered with
mats; and there being no wind, the sun became insufferably hot. i felt
myself affected with a violent head-ach, which encreased to such a
degree as to make me almost delirious. i never felt so hot a day; there
was _sensible heat_ sufficient to have roasted a _sirloin_; but the
thermometer was in a bundle in the other canoe, so that i could not
ascertain the _actual_ heat. we passed down a small stream to the north
of sego korro, and halted opposite to _segosee korro_, near the sand
hills, where i formerly waited for a passage. we waited here about an
hour for isaaco, who had gone to segosee korro to inform mansong of our
passing. when isaaco returned, he made a sort of shade over our canoe
with four sticks and a couple of cloaks; and in the evening i found
myself more collected and less feverish. at sun-set we rowed towards the
north bank, where there are some flat rocks, on which passengers by
water often sleep. we found the place occupied by a number of people. i
counted between thirty and forty fires; we therefore passed on a little
to the eastwards, and slept on a sand bank covered with verdure.

september 27th.--at day-break we again proceeded, and in stretching over
to gain the middle of the river, we passed a somoni fishing village on
an island; the huts occupied the whole of the dry ground, and it
appeared, even when close to it, like a floating village. we reached
sansanding at ten o'clock. such crowds of people came to the shore to
see us, that we could not land our baggage till the people were beaten
away with sticks, by koontie mamadie's orders, on whose premises we were
accommodated with a large hut for sitting in, having another hut opening
into it, in which we deposited our baggage.

october 2d.--_marshall_ and _w. garland_ (privates) died; one of the
fever, the other of the dysentery. during the night the wolves carried
away garland, the door of the hut where he died being left open. buried
marshall on the morning following, in a corn field near the church.

october 4th.--mansong sent down two broken gunlocks, and a large pewter
plate with a hole in the bottom of it, for me to repair; and it was with
much difficulty that i could persuade the messenger that none of us knew
any thing about such occupations.

october 6th.--_da_, mansong's eldest son, sent one canoe as a present,
and requested me to sell him a bunderbuss, and three swords, with some
blue and yellow broad cloth. sent him three swords, and ten spans of
yellow cloth; received in return six thousand cowries.

sansanding contains, according to koontie mamadie's account, eleven
thousand inhabitants. it has no public buildings, except the mosques,
two of which, though built of mud, are by no means inelegant. the market
place is a large square, and the different articles of merchandize are
exposed for sale on stalls covered with mats, to shade them from the
sun. the market is crowded with people from morning to night: some of
the stalls contain nothing but beads; others indigo in balls; others
wood-ashes in balls; others houssa and jinnie cloth. i observed one
stall with nothing but antimony in small bits; another with sulphur, and
a third with copper and silver rings and bracelets. in the houses
fronting the square is sold, scarlet, amber, silks from morocco, and
tobacco, which looks like levant tobacco, and comes by way of tombuctoo.
adjoining this is the salt market, part of which occupies one corner of
the square. a slab of salt is sold commonly for eight thousand cowries;
a large butcher's stall, or shade, is in the centre of the square, and
as good and fat meat sold every day as any in england. the beer market
is at a little distance, under two large trees; and there are often
exposed for sale from eighty to one hundred calabashes of beer, each
containing about two gallons. near the beer market is the place where
red and yellow leather is sold.

besides these market-places, there is a very large space, which is
appropriated for the great market every tuesday. on this day astonishing
crowds of people come from the country to purchase articles in
wholesale, and retail them in the different villages, &c. there are
commonly from sixteen to twenty large fat moorish bullocks killed on the
market morning.

october 8th.--as mansong had delayed much longer in sending the canoes
he promised, than i expected, i thought it best to be provided with a
sufficient quantity of shells to purchase two; particularly when i
reflected that the river would subside in the course of a few days,
having sunk this morning about four inches by the shore. i therefore
opened shop in great style, and exhibited a choice assortment of
european articles to be sold in wholesale or retail. i had of course a
_great run_, which i suppose drew on me the envy of my brother
merchants; for the jinnie people, the moors, and the merchants here
joined with those of the same description at sego, and (in presence of
modibinne, from whose mouth i had it) offered to give mansong a quantity
of merchandize of greater value than all the presents i had made him, if
he would seize our baggage, and either kill us, or send us back again
out of bambarra. they alleged, that my object was to kill mansong and
his sons by means of charms, that the white people might come and seize
on the country. mansong, much to his honour, rejected the proposal,
though it was seconded by two-thirds of the people of sego, and almost
all sansanding.

from the 8th to the 16th nothing of consequence occurred, i found my
shop every day more and more crowded with customers; and such was my run
of business, that i was sometimes forced to employ _three tellers at
once_ to count my cash. i turned one market day twenty-five thousand
seven hundred and fifty-six pieces of money (cowries.)

the second day after my arrival at marraboo, as no accounts whatever had
arrived concerning mr. scott, i sent a messenger to koomikoomi, desiring
him to bring mr. scott, or some account of him. he returned in four
days, and told us that _mr. scott was dead_, and that the natives had
stolen the pistols out of the holsters; but he had brought the horse to
bambakoo.

when modibinne enquired of isaaco what sort of a _return of presents_
would be most agreeable to me, isaaco (being instructed before) said he
believed two large canoes, and modibinne assured me, that the canoes
would be sent down to sansanding immediately on our arrival there.

in order to give a just idea of the trade and profits on different
articles sold at sansanding, i have annexed a list of _european_ and
_african_ articles, with their respective values in _cowries_, the great
medium of exchange and the general currency of bambarra.

european articles.

                       value in cowries.

a musket ---- ---- ----     6 to 7000

a cutlass ---- ---- ---- 1500 to 2000

a flint ---- ---- ---- ----        40

gunpowder, one bottle ---- ----  3000

amber no. 1. ---- ---- ---- ---- 1000

ditto no. 2. ---- ---- ---- ----  800

ditto no. 3. ---- ---- ---- ----  400

amber no. 4. ---- ---- ---- ----  160

ditto no. 5. ---- ----  ---- ----  80

ditto no. 6. ---- ---- ---- ----   60

coral no. 4. each stone ---- ----  60

black points, per bead ---- ----   20

red garnets, per string ---- ----  40

white ditto, per string ---- ----  40

blue agates, per string ---- ---- 100

round rock coral, per bead ----     5

long ditto, per bead ---- ----      5

short arrangoes, per bead  ----    40

gold beads, per bead ---- ----     10

an indian baft ---- ----       20,000

a barraloolo, or five-bar piece 8,000

scarlet cloth 10 spans ----    20,000

if sold to the karankeas _in retail_  30,000

_light yellow_ cloth nearly the same as scarlet;

_blue_ not so high

paper per sheet ---- ---- 40

a dollar ---- ---- from 6 to 12,000

or from 1l. 5s. to 2l. 10s

african produce.

a _minkalli_ of gold (12s. 6d. sterling) ----   3000

four minkallies are equal to l3. 3s.       value in cowries.

_ivory_, the very largest teeth, each ----    10,000

the medium size ---- ---- ---- ---- ----       7,000

the smaller ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----  3 or 4000

_indigo leaves_ beat and dried in lumps larger

than ones fist, each ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     40

a prime slave, (male) ---- ---- ---- ----     40,000

a ditto, (female) ---- ---- ----  from 80 to 100,000

a girl ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     40,000

a horse from two to ten prime male slaves

a cow (fat) ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     15,000

an ass ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     17,000

a sheep ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----     3 to 5,000

a fowl ---- ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      250 to 300

as much _excellent fat beef_ as will be sufficient

  for seven men one day ---- ---- ---- ----      620

as much _good beer_ as the same number can

  drink in one day ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      300

october 16th.--modibinne and jower arrived, and told me that they had
brought a canoe from mansong. i went to see it, and objected to one half
of it, which was quite rotten. they sent up to sego for another half;
but when it arrived, it would not fit the one already sent. i was
therefore forced to send isaaco again to sego; and as mansong had
requested me by modibinne to sell him any spare arms i might have, i
sent two blunderbusses, two fowling pieces, two pair of pistols, and
five unserviceable muskets; requesting in return that mansong would
either send a proper canoe, or permit me to purchase one that i might
proceed on my journey. isaaco returned on the 20th with a large canoe;
but half of it was very much decayed and patched, i therefore set about
joining the best half to the half formerly sent; and with the assistance
of abraham bolton (private) took out all the rotten pieces; and repaired
all the holes, and sewed places; and with eighteen days _hard labour,
changed the_ bambarra canoe into _his majesty's schooner joliba_; the
length forty feet, breadth six feet; being flat bottomed, draws only one
foot water when loaded.

october 28th.--at a quarter past five o'clock in the morning my dear
friend mr. alexander anderson died after a sickness of four months. i
feel much inclined to speak of his merits; but as his worth was known
only to a few friends, i will rather cherish his memory in silence, and
imitate his cool and steady conduct, than weary my friends with a
panegyric in which they cannot be supposed to join. i shall only observe
that no event which took place during the journey, ever threw the
smallest gloom over my mind, till i laid mr. anderson in the grave. i
then felt myself, as if left a second time lonely and friendless amidst
the wilds of africa.

november 14th.--the schooner is now nearly ready for our departure; i
only wait for isaaco's return from sego, that i may give him this paper
in charge.

november 15th.--isaaco returned; and told us that mansong was anxious
that i should depart as soon as possible, before the moors to the east
had intimation of my coming. bought bullock hides to form an awning to
secure us from the spears and arrows of the _surka_ or _soorka_ and
_mahinga_ who inhabit the north bank of the river betwixt jinnie and
tombuctoo.

november 16.--all ready and we sail to-morrow morning, or evening. i
will therefore conclude this long epistle with some miscellaneous
information.

  _variation_ of the compass.

west of the faleme river ---- ----      14 11 west.

at badoo, near sibikillin ---- ----     14 56

near the _bafing_ ---- ---- ----        16 30

at marraboo on the niger ---- ----      16 36

at yamina ---- ---- ---- ---- ----      17 11

at sansanding ---- ----  ---- ----      17 40

in case any one should be inclined to doubt the accuracy of the
latitudes taken by the back observation with troughton's pocket sextant;
i think it proper to mention that i have observed at sansanding
alternately with the _horizon of the river_, and the _back observation_
in water and the artificial horizon; and never found them to vary more
than four minutes, but generally much nearer.

a fac-simile sketch of the course of the niger, made by an old somonie,
who had been seven times at tombuctoo, and is now going the eighth.

_ba nimma_ rises in the kong mountains south of marraboo; it passes one
day's journey south of sego; and having received a branch from miniana,
empties itself into the lake dibbie. it is not quite half so large as
the niger. i have not the least doubt of the truth of this, having heard
it from so many people. we shall not see jinnie in going to tombuctoo.

_route from sego to miniana._

from sego in one day,

deena, across the ba nimma in canoes, and halt on
the south side; thence in one day,
dahmaroo,
sijirri,
neaguana,
mullo soo,
billi soo;
in all seven days.

the inhabitants of miniana eat their enemies, and strangers, if they die
in the country. they eat the flesh of horses; but such is their
veneration for the cow that she is never killed; when she dies, they eat
the flesh. miniana is hilly; all the grains are cultivated the same as
in bambarra.

                 _route from sego to badoo_.
from sego in one day.
    koogoo,
    n. goi, [footnote: thus written in park's ms.]
    jeenna,
    doo-wassoo.
    choyna,
    guandoo on the banks of the badingfing, a small
      river from miniana.
    cheraboo,
    baboo,
    blendoo,
    koolokoo,
    kay-a,
    wangeera,
    jibbi,
    nemansana,
    kooli,
    chemosoo,
    n. jeera,
    chekora,
    koonteela,
    doomba,
    chongi,
  teng: gera, a great juli town; a juli is called in
        baedoo, kirko bimba;
  teeleemagee,
  soomasoo,
  koorinsoo,
  jondoo; juli town,
  sala,
  n. kannoo, juli town.

the whole of the foregoing places are in bambarra.

  totti, a town in baedoo.
  baedoo, the capital.

the julis are people who understand the language of baedoo and miniana,
and are employed as interpreters and brokers by the salt merchants. one
month's travel south of baedoo through the kingdom of gotto, will bring
the traveller to the country of the christians, who have their houses on
the banks of the _ba sea feena_; this water they represent as being
imcomparably larger than the lake dibbie, and that the water sometimes
flows one way, sometimes another. there are no shea trees in kong or
gotto, and very few in baedoo.




isaaco's journal.

vol. ii.


_government house

sierra leone, 10th december, 1811._

"my lord,

"with reference to my letter of the 8th of march 1810, communicating
having engaged a person to go in search, and ascertain the fate of the
late mr. mungo park; i have the honour to communicate to your lordship,
that this person returned to senegal on the 1st of september; but i am
concerned to state that his information confirms the various reports of
mr. park's death.

"i have enclosed a copy of the journal of the person whom i sent, which
was kept in arabic, and has been translated into english by a person
resident in senegal.

"isaaco has been paid the promised reward, which i hope will be approved
by your lordship.

"i have the honour to be,

"my lord,

"your lordship's most obedient

"humble servant,

"c.w. maxwell.

"_governor._"


_to the right honourable
the earl of liverpool._



isaaco's journal.


i, isaaco, left senegal on sunday, the 22d day of the moon tabasky;
[footnote: seventh of january, 1810.] in the afternoon we came to an
anchor at the foot of the bar. we passed the bar next morning, and had
like to have lost ourselves; we got on board the george. weighed anchor
in the night of the 23d, from the roads, and anchored at goree the 24th
at about 4 p.m. [footnote: these times of the day are not very exact,
being regulated by the mahometan times of prayer.] on my arrival there,
i found some of my effects had been stolen; i signified to the
commandant of goree my intention to postpone my voyage, until my stolen
goods were found. the commandant sent me back on board the george, and
ordered the vessel to return to senegal, that i might make there my
complaint to governor maxwell. we were nine days at sea with heavy
weather, and could not fetch; we were obliged to return to goree on the
tenth day.

the commandant next day (friday) after my arrival, sent a courier to
senegal to the governor, with the account of my goods being stolen; and
on the friday following the courier brought me my effects. [footnote:
these goods had been stolen in the lighter outside of the bar.] the same
day in the afternoon, i left goree in the george, and arrived in gambia,
the night after at yoummy. we left yoummy on the sunday following, and
arrived on monday at jilifrey. we left jilifrey the same day; passed
tancrowaly, in the night, and on tuesday came opposite a forest. passed
this spot, and came to anchor at baling. from baling came to an anchor
opposite a forest at four p.m. we got under weigh in the night and came
to in the morning. departed after breakfast, and came to at noon.
departed immediately after, and came to after sunset. passed caour in
the night, and came to anchor at four a.m. (thursday). weighed in the
evening and came to yanimmarou at noon. we left yanimmarou in the
morning of friday, and came to mongha. left the mongha the same day at
sunset, and came to mariancounda late in the evening, and robert ainsley
being there, i landed and presented to him the governor's letter; making
in all eight days from goree to my arrival at mariancounda.

robert ainsley kept me five days with him. he gave me, by the governor's
desire, one horse, one ass, and twenty bars of beads. i left robert
ainsley on wednesday morning, and went to the village of the king of
cataba to pay my respects. i had previously sent the same day, my
baggage and people, to giammalocoto. on my arrival before cataba, i gave
him one musket, and one string of amber no. 4. which he distributed to
his attendants. in the evening of the same day, i took leave of the
king, and arrived at giammalocoto, after sunset, where i met my people
and effects. i left giammalocoto, on friday morning, and slept at
tandacounda. i departed next morning (saturday) and slept at guenda. on
sunday crossed a rivulet and slept under a tamarind tree close to the
village of sandougoumanna. i sent to sallatigua-koura, king of that
country, five bars of tobacco (ten heads). i went and slept at
woullimanna. i gave to mansancoije, the chief, two bars of scarlet cloth
and two bars of tobacco, and to his son, one bar of scarlet cloth. i
also gave to my landlord three bars of tobacco. departed next day early;
stopped at carropa at noon, and went to coussage, where we slept. i
there found my family, who had been driven away by the bambarra army. i
staid at coussage two days and gave maitafodey, chief of the village,
three bottles of powder. [footnote: one bottle of powder passes for five
bars.] we left coussage in the evening, with all my family; arrived at
montogou in the morning, where my family resided before the bambarra
army entered this country. i here found my mother. i staid at montogou
about one month and a half, or forty-six days.

having disposed of such of my property as i could not carry with me, i
left montogou at about nine a.m. with my family and people, stopped at
moundoundon, having crossed three rivulets; slept there. mamadou, the
chief, killed me a sheep: i gave him one bottle of powder. we departed
in the morning, stopped at couchiar at noon, under a bark-tree, where we
passed the rest of the day. we filled our leather bags with water and
departed about four p.m. we travelled all night and came to saabie at
three a.m. this village is inhabited by marabous (priests). we stayed
there two days. i found there a relation of one of my wives. i gave him
one bottle of powder and three pagnes (a piece of cloth the natives make
use of in their dresses). we left saabie in the morning, stopped at noon
at joumajaoury, and arrived at tallimangoly. i there met a relation who
killed a sheep. i gave him three grains of amber. we slept there. next
morning we departed, and arrived at midnight at baniscrilla, where i
found the king of bondou with the bambarra army. i went to pay my
respects to him, and gave him ten bottles of powder, thirteen grains of
amber no. 1, two grains of coral no. 1, and one handsome tin box. to his
first valet one pagne, worth one piece of baft; to his goldsmith four
pagnes; to the chief of the village two bottles of powder. (ten bars.)
slept there two nights; departed early, so did the army on their way to
gambia. we stopped at noon at cambaya, being very hungry: we departed in
the evening; and slept on the road. at about eight a.m. on the next day,
we passed gnary and sangnongagy; received at this last village some peas
without stopping. we stopped at noon at dougay. next morning early we
departed, and stopped at noon at daacada; in the evening we stopped and
slept at bougoldanda. next day we stopped at noon at saamcolo. some
singers of the village paid me a visit; i gave them a few trinkets. i
had here a grand palaver (dispute) about one of my dogs, who had, as was
said, bit a man; with great difficulty i prevented the animal from being
killed.

departed next day early; arrived at noon at soumbourdaga, and slept
there. next morning at nine a.m. arrived at debbou; my friend saloumou
gave me two sheep; i gave him two bottles of powder. saloumou told me he
would keep me company to sego if i pleased; i readily agreed, and gave
him ten pagnes to give to his wife to support her until his return. next
morning, saloumou being ready, we departed from debbou: we crossed the
faleme, and stopped on the other side at a village also called debbou. i
bought there two sheep and some corn; we staid there three days, and had
our corn converted into kouskous. we departed from debbou early on
monday, the first day of raky gamon, [footnote: may 4, 1810.] and
arrived at noon at the village of diggichoucoumee, the residence of the
king of bondou: we stayed there four days and killed two sheep. i gave
to almami sega two bottles of powder; bought one sheep. departed early
and went to sabcouria, where we slept; it is the last village of bondou
to the northward.

left sabcouria early, and passed gouloumbo: we slept on the road. next
morning at nine a. m. we stopt at dramana, in sight of saint joseph, the
fort of galam; we staid there five days. i was forced to stay there so
long, on account of a palaver i had with the family of one of my wives,
who opposed her going on the voyage with me: i was divorced, and she had
to give me what she had received at our marriage, which is the law among
us mahomedans. i received one bullock and four sheep. i gave the chief
euchoumana fourteen bars in amber and powder; to the people one bottle
and a half of powder, and two bars of amber; to the chief of galam two
bottles of powder and twenty flints.

we departed early; crossed _choligota_ [footnote: the ch must be
pronounced through the throat.] and taning_ch_olee, two rivulets, and
arrived at noon at moussala; slept there. we were well treated by the
chief. i gave him two flints and thirty loads of powder. departed very
early, and arrived at tambouncana on the senegal river. i there saw a
moor who had a very fine mare, which i bought with the goods which were
returned to me in my palaver at dramana. the king of bambarra built
there a large fort. we departed, and arrived at noon at samicouta; we
then went to gui_ch_alel, where we slept at the house of amady face,
chief of the village. we stopt there the next day, owing to one of my
slaves running away, whom i got back again. early in the morning we
crossed the senegal river at settoucoule, on the moors' side. i bought
one sheep; slept there, and was well treated.

departed early; stopt at nine a.m. at coulou, and slept there; we found
there only the women, the men had followed the bambarra army. departed
early, crossed _ch_olibinne and arrived at challimancounna, where i
staid two days. ourigiague, the chief, received me well, and killed a
bullock. i gave him one bottle of powder. we departed long before
day-break, crossed fallaou, stopt at day-break at the lake of douro to
take water; we went on, and arrived at nine a.m. at medina. i was
obliged to stay there twelve days, to wait the return of one of my
fellow travellers; not hearing any thing of him, i sent a man after him,
because i had lent him my mare and a musket. the man brought me back my
mare and musket. i was there well treated by the chief and village
people, who gave me five sheep. i gave them in return one bottle of
powder, and one and a half bars. i bought a sheep. this completed the
three moons from my departure from montogou.

we departed early, and crossed kirgout, a river full of hippopotami and
alligators. at noon arrived at cougnacary, formerly the metropolis of
the kingdom of casso, but now occupied by bambarras. received one sheep,
and gave one bottle of powder and five flints. we slept there, and next
day early went round and crossed the river kirgout again. at nine a.m.
passed maretoumane; farther on, passed a large rock called tap-pa.
arrived at noon at camatingue, after crossing five rivers; we staid
there two days; received a bullock and a sheep from the seracoolies
residing in casso. i gave to nare-moussa, the chief, half a bottle of
powder, and ten grains of amber. one of my slaves was there redeemed,
and i received another in exchange. i met there the king of bambarra's
messenger; i gave him half a bottle of powder. we departed early,
crossed garry between two rocks; arrived at noon at lambatara; slept
there. we were all the way surrounded by mountains and rocks. we started
early, after taking water for our provisions, and had to ascend high
mountains. about noon we arrived at the top of one of them; a part of my
people went forward. when on the very top of the hill, they were
surrounded and attacked by such a quantity of bees, that my people and
beasts of burden were scattered; [footnote: the bees in those parts of
the country are very numerous, especially on the tops of the mountains.
a similar accident from the attack of bees is mentioned by park in his
journal, p. 37. see also vol. i. p. 331.] when they were a little
appeased, we went after our beasts, who had thrown away every thing they
had on their backs. i found one of my asses dead, being stifled by the
bees getting into its nostrils, and one of my men almost dead by their
stings. i had to give him something to bring him to life, and that with
a great deal of pains. we slept at the foot of that mountain, under a
monkey-bread tree.

departed early; at nine a.m. we met on the road one of the king of
bambarra's messengers, who was sent after me; we stopped and sat under a
tree together; he told me he was sent by his master, to let me know if
he met me at cougnacary, he was ordered to procure me plenty of
provisions, and keep me there to rest myself; but as he had met me on
the road, and a long way past cougnacary, he would lead me to the first
village, would get me some provisions, and that i might stay there to
rest myself; to which i agreed. we passed goundouguede and arrived at
four p.m. at jyggiting yalla; on my arrival i told the messenger my
intention of sending somebody to the king, to let him know of my being
in his dominions, and near him. i then sent saloumon my friend to
giocha, where the king resided. i told him on his arrival at giocha, to
go to sabila, the chief of all the king's slaves, and a confident of
his, to give him thirteen grains of amber no. 1, one pair of scissars,
one snuff-box, and one looking-glass; and tell him i sent him those
things as a present, and let him know of my arrival. after this man's
departure, i sent another messenger, and desired him to go to giocha, to
endeavour to see my old friend allasana-bociara, one of the king of
sego's messengers, who were sent as ambassadors, and tell him that i
send him this grain of amber, and that piece [footnote: one round half
dollar.] of silver, as a mark of my being near him, and not to leave
giocha before he saw me. i had learnt his arrival there by a caravan of
slaves i met on the road.

after i had sent these two messengers unknown to one another, the king's
messenger came in the evening, and told me he was going away, but should
give orders to the first village he should come to, to receive me well
and give me provisions and all assistance; and that i should wait there
for further orders. i then slept there: in the course of the night, the
chief of the village where i was ordered to go and stop for further
orders, sent a messenger to his son here, where i was, desiring him to
stop me here. next morning his son came to me, and said it was useless
for me to go any farther; that his father had sent to him and desired he
would furnish me with whatever i wanted and keep me here. i told him, if
i staid where i was, i should die with all my family, of hunger and
thirst; and that i would go on where i was ordered, unless i was stopped
by force. i immediately got every thing ready and departed.

at noon, we arrived at maribougou, where i was ordered to stop. foula
massa, the chief, sent me to his brother to take up lodgings. when i
came to his brother's house i was refused lodgings; i then went under a
large monkey-bread tree and made halt there. the chief came and told me
to stay here; i said i could not, as water was very scarce, and my
company very numerous. he immediately gave orders that no one in the
village should draw water, so that i might not want, and that i should
have no excuse. i took that opportunity to give drink to all my people
and cattle, and filled my skins. being ready to depart from thence, the
two men i had sent to giocha from jyggiting yalla, arrived; one told me
he had seen sabila, and delivered my message and present to him; that
sabila said, he perceived i wanted to be his friend, to which he had no
objection; the other messenger told me, that the king of sego's
ambassador said i might be assured he would not leave giocha before he
saw me, according to my desire.

i had in my caravan a merchant i met at dramana; he came from senegal,
and had some friends in this village, who sent to tell him to take away
his goods from mine and put them aside, as i was in great danger of
being plundered, and his goods would be lost to him if found amongst
mine; to which he objected; which gave me a proof of his good
intentions, and of his friendship to me. i was then convinced something
unpleasant was planning against me. i therefore forced this merchant to
take away his goods from mine; as it would be unjust he should suffer on
my account. i then placed myself and people against the tree, well
armed. i had two double-barrelled guns and a musket in good order, and
well loaded; and waited for what should happen.

while i was in this state of defence, a messenger from the king came to
me, the same man i had met first, who told me, that as i was complaining
of want of water, he would conduct me to another village. we accordingly
departed, and arrived at wassaba; when there, the messenger shewed me a
house where i was to take up my lodging, and have my things in safety.
he then wanted to separate my people from me and scatter them in the
village, so as to have a better chance to plunder me; to which i
strongly objected. i went with my people, baggage, &c. into the middle
of the yard of the house appointed for my lodging, and staid there.

the chief of the village came to me, and desired i should give him my
people to go and fetch me a bullock: the king's messenger took him aside
and spoke a little while to him: he came again and told me he could not
give me now the bullock, as his cattle were too far off among the king's
herd. when the messenger saw me settle in the yard, and disposed to
spend the evening there, he left me and went away.

when i was sure of his departure, i sent another man to giocha, and
ordered him to go to madiguijou marabou, who would introduce him to
sabila; and when there, to give sabila seven grains of amber, and tell
him to go and let the king know, that wherever i went, i met some of his
people who stopped me from one place to another; and my intention was
positively to go to him, and to beg sabila to obtain my request. my
courier came back the next day, and told me that sabila said, the king,
his master's pleasure was, that i should stay where i was, and come to
see him (the king) on the next day, with which i complied.

next day the king sent a messenger to me with orders to lead me to him.
i left my family and baggage, taking three horsemen of my people with me
and four footmen, and departed with the messenger. i had, previous to
that, sent a man before me with five grains of the largest amber no. 1.
with orders to wait at giocha for me. we arrived at the back of the
village at three p.m. on tuesday; the man i had sent before me, was
there waiting for me; he told me softly that where i was going we were
betrayed; and not to let the king know of my going to sego, as our lives
depended upon it. i told him, that he well knew, i was sent by the
governor of senegal to sego; and to sego i must go, unless i was
prevented by death or force. i then entered the village and went
straight to the king's door, followed by his messenger, i there
alighted; the messenger made me wait at the door, and went in to take
the king's orders. he came back immediately and told me the king was
sleeping; the guard took possession of my people and me, and lodged us
in the guard-room with them. it was then about sunset, and not a single
soul of my friends and acquaintances or relations came to see me. i then
began to think seriously what was to be done. a griot [footnote: ballad
singer and dancer.] woman was the only person who came to comfort me in
my distress.

this woman on leaving me went immediately to the ambassadors of sego
(which i afterwards learnt), and said to them, "oh me, oh me, my back is
broke." [footnote: an expression of sorrow among the cassonkes.] the
ambassadors asked her the reason; she said, "because isaaco our friend
is here, and they are going to kill him." sabila being a very powerful
man, and not hearing from him, i sent my boy to madiguijou; and begged
he would introduce the boy to sabila, and when there, to give him the
five grains of amber. not being well guarded, i sent another man to my
landlord where i always resided when i passed in this village, with my
compliments, and my surprise at not seeing him since my arrival. he sent
me word that he was happy to hear of my being so near him and in good
health, and that nobody had given him any notice of my arrival: which
last words i attributed to his being afraid to meddle with me while in
the king's hands. i sent in the night the merchant who was advised to
draw his goods from mine at maribougou, to the sego ambassadors; and
informed them of my being here.

seeing the guards' carelessness, i went (still in the night) to my
landlord, who had still some influence near the king, and gave him one
of my wives necklaces, nine grains of amber, and seven grains of coral.
from thence i went to madiguijou, and told him i was sent on a mission
to the king of sego, with some papers; in order to facilitate me on my
voyage in search of a white man gone in the interior of this country
long ago. i went from there to sabila and told him the same thing.
afterwards i went back to the guard-house, and laid myself down to
sleep; while the guards were amusing themselves in dancing, singing, and
drinking. my slumber being disturbed by my uneasy mind, i awoke and
found all the guards gone.

i went to take the air, and returned again to sleep, but could not. i
heard the feet of several horsemen in the street, going, i presumed, to
sabila's house. early in the morning i sent another message to the
ambassadors, to let them know how critically i was situated; that i
heard they were going away to sego without me; and my uneasiness at not
hearing a word from them. they sent to ask me why i did not follow this
time the same road i had followed on my other voyage. i sent back the
man to let them know as the two kingdoms were at peace, i thought it
secure and safe to travel through this part; that mungo park had
promised king mansong a present; and mungo park not returning, the
governor of senegal had entrusted this same present to me for mansong,
and that i was now the bearer of it. however, since they were determined
to go without me, they might do so, and whether i should be released or
die; they should hear it soon enough at sego. they sent to
tiguing-coroba [footnote: vulgarly tiguing-coro.] (the king) a message
saying; we have heard that isaaco our friend is at giocha, bearer of a
present to dacha (king of sego) which mr. park had promised to mansong
(dacha's father); that mr. park not returning in time to his country,
his friends had appointed isaaco to be the bearer of that present, which
is with him now, and is destined for sego, to the king our master. in
case isaaco wishes to go back, we beg you will not let him do so; but if
he wishes to go on, on his mission to sego, we also beg and hope you
will give him all assistance, and some trusty persons to conduct him to
sego. [footnote: this equivocal invitation was given to the king, who
well knew that the king of sego was more powerful than him; and if he
should injure isaaco in any manner, he would be driven from his
dominions.]

then came massatan wague, a marabou, who told me what i have above
related, and how i had been arrested with an intention to destroy me,
and take what i had; that sibila had been the means of my escaping such
danger, and had saved my life; to which story i gave little credit,
knowing well the reason why they shewed me such mercy; but i thanked god
alone for my preservation. massatan wague advised me to give the king's
only son something. i went to that prince, and gave him half a piece of
white baft, and two grains of amber no. 1. i went back to the
guard-house, where i passed the following night.

next morning my landlord went to the king to beg (as every thing was
settled and appeared favourable on my side) that he might take me to his
lodging; to which the king consented. he immediately came and took me
away to his house with my people. i went with my land-lord
(tong-manchong) and my people to the king: on arriving, after the usual
salutations, i presented him with a fine tin box. the king addressed
sabila, and said with a nod, "here is the business." sabila said, "this
man is our old friend, and is a good man." my landlord said the same.
the king turned to me and said, "no; here is your box and keep it; what
else you have brought in my country i shall keep; you may return to the
place you first started from, and travel on your mission by the same
road you travelled first, with the white men; but your goods, and every
thing else you have with you, i shall keep. i know what you have is
destined to the king of sego." i said, "i might, it is true, have
traveiled by other roads, and you would never have heard of me; but in
my way, i heard you lived in peace and friendship with the king of sego;
i therefore thought i might with security travel through your country."
he stopped me, saying, "what i have said to you is enough."

i left the house with part of his slaves. i went to my lodging, and
immediately completed the amount of sixty bars in powder, amber, &c. i
took the horse robert ainsley had bought for me, three ducks, and the
tin box he refused. i gathered all these things, and went with my
landlord and offered them as presents to the king, which he accepted: in
his presence i gave sabila one bottle of powder; to the king's singer
one snuff-box. the king, on seeing these presents, (the only thing to
cool his anger) told me he would lend me somebody who would conduct me
straight to sego. i said, "i could not go so soon; because if i did,
whoever would see me would think i deserted from him; and i therefore
thought proper to stay where i was and rest myself awhile." the king
said to sabila, "you see isaaco appears to be a courageous man; if he
had been of a weak-spirited mind, he would have run away, and left his
things in my hands." i went home, and spent the rest of the day and the
night.

in the morning i departed with my people to wassaba, to fetch my family
and things; i staid there two days; but being uneasy in my mind, and
being afraid of something planning against me, and as i had good reason
to think so by the few words i heard at different times, i went back to
giocha, presented myself to the king; and told him that before i left
his dominions, i had thought proper to come and swear fidelity and
friendship to him; and that whenever i should go backwards or forwards
from senegal to sego, i should always pass through his country and see
him; but that i should wish also at the same time that he would swear to
protect and treat me well, and be my friend; even should he be at war
with the king of sego. he sent for chiaman, the eldest son of the royal
family, who swore the same to me in his and the king's name. i likewise
swore before them what i related above. after swearing, chiaman told me
to give him a handsome gun or a coussabi (shirt) by way of cementing our
oaths. i told him, i had none at present fit to present to him, but gave
him my word, that if i should go back to the white men's country, on my
return i would bring him one of those two objects.

i staid in the village until the next morning. i had in the mean while
wrote a prayer (grisgris) or amulet, to a man who gave me a bullock,
which i carried to wassaba; i slept there. next morning i had the
bullock killed. the next day iaque, chiaman's brother, sent me word to
wait there for him. i immediately sent my family and things by another
road, and waited for iaque. he came and presented me with an ass loaded
with kouskous to help me in my travels. i gave him half a piece of fine
white baft, five bottles of powder, two looking-glasses, and two
snuff-boxes. he then left me, and i went the same day to giocha, to take
leave of the king, and beg he would let me have the promised conductor
(between wassaba and giocha there being seven rivulets to cross.) he
gave me a man named mourocouro, who went on foot. he then shook hands
with me, saying, "isaaco, i bear you no malice now; but did so once,
because you conducted white men to sego; and never passed here to let me
have something from them, whilst every body else shared their
generosity." i took my leave of him and went to chicouray, chiaman's
village, where i met my family and things safe. i staid there two days.
chaiman killed me a bullock, and i gave him one pagne, worth two pieces
of bafts, one bottle of powder, twenty flints, and one bar of scarlet
cloth.

we started in the evening and arrived at chicouray. [footnote: these two
last villages bear the same name.] sambabile (chiaman's other brother)
gave me some corn and a sheep. i gave him a blue pagne, a striped ditto,
one bottle of powder, twenty flints, and one bar of scarlet cloth; which
pagnes i got by the sale of three slaves i was obliged to sell to help
me in my expenses. i staid there two days; in the morning i started, and
arrived at noon at jyallacoro; where resided madifoutane, the king's
son, to whom i had given half a piece of fine cotton and two grains of
amber; he gave me some corn. madimarian, a marabou, killed me a bullock;
i give him one bottle of powder.

next morning i started from thence, passed three villages, and arrived
at three p.m. at cobla. i received cooked victuals from the village; i
gave two flints. we departed next morning early, and arrived at noon at
amadifalouma bougou, the last village belonging to king tiguing-coro, it
being on wednesday, and six moons [footnote: july 2, 1810.] after my
departure from senegal. i bought there an ass.

having before me a large forest to cross, and uncertain of the right
road, i hired four men to conduct me. i departed next morning, and
crossed a small river near the village. we entered the forest at noon,
and came to a large muddy pond, where the hogs could not pass safely;
our guides shewed us a better road, where we crossed easily. at two p.m.
we stopped where had been formerly a village. we found in our way after
sun-set, a large land turtle, which we killed; and passed the night
there. departed early; at ten a.m. passed sarina, formerly a village;
stopped awhile. the four men i had charged to go as guides, wished to go
back; they were afraid to go on further. i was much disappointed at such
behaviour, and got angry with them, and said i would sooner go back than
be left in such a forest. they shewed me a road, and told me to follow
it straight along, and to be careful not to turn either to the right or
left, and that i should soon find a village inhabited. i gave them half
a bottle of powder and ten flints, and let them go, as i could not do
otherwise.

i went on, and found the road the king of sego's army had taken nine
years ago. [footnote: when at war with tiguing-coro.] farther on we met
a small pond; being very thirsty, we spent there the best part of the
day; a little farther we found a large pond, where we made a halt, and
past the night under a tree. departed early; arrived at noon at the
lakes of chinchare and tirinn. these lakes are never dry; and the king's
army always stops at them to take water. after dinner we started, and at
five p.m. arrived at another lake. we went on, and came to the village
of giangounte after sun-set; where we stopped five days, on account of
one of my people being sick; received the first night a few provisions;
next day they killed me a bullock. here i thanked god for my escape.

on the third day the king's people came; the village gave them a bullock
and a sheep, which i killed myself; they gave me a quarter of each for
my share. this village is surrounded by a mud wall, is well fortified,
and i presume is well secured against any attack. one of the hogs being
very large and fat, i could not carry it any farther, but with great
difficulty: i told the chief of the village to take charge of the hog,
and have it conveyed to the king his master; to which he objected, being
afraid to take charge of an unknown animal, and the additional
responsibility of taking charge of it for his master. i told him i found
it impossible for me to carry it any farther; i should therefore leave
it with him, and he might do with it as he pleased. that the village
belonged to his master, so did the hog, and i was sure he would take
good care of it.

we departed early and arrived at noon at fabougou. after dinner we went
to giongoey, where we arrived after sun-set; we staid there two days.
early in the morning we departed, and at ten a.m. arrived at the lake
sonne; stopped a little under a tree; crossed the lake; stopped awhile
at tonneguela; arrived and stopped at gommingtora, where we spent the
night; received a sheep. departed early, and at ten a. m. arrived at
wattere. departed in the evening and came to a large open field, very
dangerous for travellers, on account of the moors passing there very
often. we therefore travelled during the day and all the night.

at three a.m. came to toucha. on my way from gommingtora here, i saw a
tree grown on the top of the dried stump of another large tree; the wood
of the above tree is employed in the composition of our gunpowder. there
is also near the tree a large and high rock, forming a pyramid, and a
large stone on the top of its head. on my arrival at toucha, i missed a
chest which my nephew carried, and which contained some looking glasses,
beads, my fine coussabi, and my wife's bracelets, which were given me by
governor maxwell. i asked the boy what was become of it; he said, that
being fatigued on the way, he had given the chest to a man who had
followed our caravan from giocha. i suspected the man had stolen it, by
not seeing him with us. i left my family and things there, and went
immediately with some of the king's people to wattera in search of the
thief. i had the chief of toucha's son and the son of the chief of
wattera with me. from wattera we went to tagoubou, where we found the
thief, who had broken the chest and taken away the things; he had on my
coussabi, had sold some things, and had in hand the remainder, looking
after a slave to purchase. we seized him. the chief of tagoubou begged
me not to hurt him in his village, but to carry him to dinghang. arrived
at dinghang. maineoro, the chief, told me, since i caught the thief, i
might take him away, and do as i thought proper with him.

we went and slept at togouboo, and next morning went to wattera.
departed in the evening and arrived at night at toucha, and joined my
family. on our way the thief shewed me where he had destroyed the chest.
i found the boards useless, and left them. i left toucha early next
morning, and at nine a.m. arrived at douabougou. the chief wished me to
stay, but i refused, and he gave me a sheep. farther on we passed
dilla-faa courna and bonabougou, where we staid awhile, and went to see
magnacoro at sunset: (these villages are all surrounded by ronn-trees;
[footnote: a species of palm tree. (i do not know the particular
name.)]) the thief carrying all the way the remaining hog. on my way
there, one of my people staid on the road, having a sore leg. i was well
treated at magnacoro and slept there; the man with the sore leg came
next day. i staid two days. there is in this village a fine doualli
tree, the first i had seen on my way from senegal; this tree is most
beautiful, always green and in blossom, but bearing no fruit whatever.
on the back of the village there is a foundery for casting iron; at a
little distance on the river there is a cataract, not quite so high as
the feloups. i took guides to shew me the right road. departed early; at
noon arrived at soubacarra, passed tacoutalla; crossed there a small
rivulet; farther on crossed another, and stopped at sirecaime, a village
situated between two mountains, where we slept. next morning received
ten moulles [footnote: a small measure made out of a calabash.] of corn
and departed.

at noon arrived at camecon; received there from fiong, the chief, a
sheep, some milk, and corn. in the afternoon departed, and passed
sidong. at sun-set arrived at sannanba, where we slept. i found here my
sister and one of my wives i had left in my voyage with mr. park, and
where they waited for my return. i asked them what they heard concerning
mr. park. they assured me that they had seen alhagi biraim, who told
them that mr. park was dead; and that he saw the canoe in which he died
in the country of haoussa; to which country, he, alhagi, had been, and
to the place where mr. park died. yamme marabou gave me bullock; so did
moulina one; guiniba one; and facoro, the chief, also one and some corn.
two sheep were given to me by alhagi; one by fatuna-bougou; one by
amadibinne-doucara, and three by dimba soumares. we staid there eight
days.

on the ninth day the hog i had left behind was brought here. i received
one ass from mouline: i gave to amadibinne one musket and five yards of
white cotton; to yamme half a bottle of powder; to my sister ten dollars
and one muslin pagne; to the chief one bottle of powder and twenty
flints. i released here the thief, who all the way had carried the hog;
i released him, because i was certain, that, if once in the king's
power, he would be put to death. four days after the hog came, being the
thirteenth day of my stay at sannamba (saturday), and the seventh moon
of my voyage.

i departed early, and ordered the hog to be brought along by the same
people; passed baromba, took water at a large fountain; passed
bancoumalla. after passing a large lake, stopped and slept at sirberra,
at the house of babamerine, who killed a sheep: received from manchia
the chief, one sheep; i gave them twenty loads of powder and ten flints.
departed in the night, and arrived at two in the morning at counnow.
there is but one well for the whole village, and three beautiful large
doualli trees are round it. found there the king's army.

there is on the east of the village an enormous large tree, inhabited by
a great number of bats; another such tree is on the west side of the
village, likewise full of bats; but what is most extraordinary, the bats
of the east constantly go at night to the west, and return to the east
at the approach of day; those of the west never go to the east. the bats
are all of the same kind. the natives say that their lawful king lies on
the west. [footnote: tiguing-coro, the descendant of the lawful kings of
sego.] the army departed about three, and i about day-light; we met on
the road the rear guard on its way to join the army. at four p.m.
arrived at gargnie, a large village, where we slept. there is but one
door to enter it, and two large trees on each side of the door; the
village is situated in the front of a beautiful large lake, which
supplies them with water. we met there a caravan from cancare; received
from them a few collas. departed early, and at ten a.m. arrived at
dedougou, where we slept. the people of gargnie had brought here the hog
and gone back; and the people of this village being all out in their
fields, i was obliged to wait until next morning, so as to have the hog
carried; received three fowls; i gave three loads of powder. next
morning i required four hands to carry the hog (which imposition i laid
on every village i came to) and departed. passed issicora and five
deserted villages; at four p. m. arrived at yaminna, and stayed there
three days, at the house of boya modiba, who killed me a sheep. i gave
him two bars of scarlet cloth. a woman who had been redeemed at
montogou, and who had followed my caravan, found here her husband, who
gave me a sheep and a hundred collas.

departed early and arrived at noon at yaminna, [footnote: bearing the
same name as the last place.] on the river joliba (niger). i wanted to
cross the river immediately, but the rain prevented me; at four p.m.
embarked in a canoe, and went on till about ten p.m. arrived at
mognongo, on the other side of the river, having passed nine villages.
the river here is very wide. departed again, and arrived at noon at
samman; lodged with guinguina, where we formerly lodged with mr. park,
and where we lost three white men by sickness. at four p.m. departed,
and arrived at sun-set at sego-coro, on the opposite side of samman,
having passed four villages; lodged with sego somma.

this village was formerly the residence of the kings; and to this day,
when the king wishes to go to war, he always goes there to have his
gris-gris (amulets) made, and to prepare himself. when they take a king,
a prince, or a man of high rank, whether a stranger, or of the country,
they confine him until the fasting moon is come. he is brought in that
moon to this village, and laid down in a house appropriated for this
purpose only. his throat is then cut across. when the blood has
completely stained the ground, the body is carried into the open field,
and left a prey to the wild beasts. there is not a fasting moon, but
that one or more are butchered in the house, and for the space of eight
days after these executions, no man, whatever he may be, is allowed to
pass by that house (called kognoba) without pulling off his shoes or
cap.

departed early, passed segobougou, segocoura, and douabougou, and
arrived about eight a.m. at sego-chicoro, the residence of dacha king of
the bambarras, on monday 11th of the moon. [footnote: august 26, 1810.]
this town was built by dacha's grandfather, [footnote: mansong's father,
named wolloo.] who rebelled against the lawful king; being chosen leader
at the head of his party, drove the king from his dominions, who retired
to the west, [footnote: he is obliged to gather another army and go
himself at the head of it, to revenge the first, should it be
destroyed.] and was proclaimed king himself. being a great warrior, he
maintained himself on the usurped throne, and left it to his posterity,
who enjoy it peaceably now.

i lodged with guiawe, a man attached to the king. next morning the king
hearing of my arrival, sent to tell me he was going to douabougou, and
wished i would go and see him there. he had got on his horse and was
proceeding, when a heavy shower of rain came on; he dismounted and went
back to his house. after the rain, he ordered me to come to him, and
bring him the hogs in the manner i had tied them for travelling. on my
entrance in the first yard i found a guard of forty men, young, strong,
and without beards. on entering another yard i met another guard, well
armed and very numerous, lying in the shade. a little farther on i found
the king sitting; there were four broad swords stuck in the ground, on
each side and behind him, which had been given to him by mr. park. he
had on his military coat, which he is obliged to wear when he sends out
an army, and cannot leave off until the army returns. he commonly wears
dresses of white or blue cotor, or silk, with a great many gris-gris,
covered with plates of gold or silver, sewed about his dresses. i sat
down on one side of him, and my landlord on the other side. after the
usual salutations, i laid before him the drum, the two blunderbusses,
the bed, the two hogs, the scarlet cloth, &c. and one dog. [footnote:
the other got away on leaving mariancounda, and was lost.] i said to
him: "maxwell, governor of senegal, salutes you, and sends his
compliments to you; here is the present which manchong (or mansong) your
father asked of mr. park, and which he promised to send him." he said,
"is the governor well?" i said, "yes, he is well, and desired me to beg
your assistance in his endeavours to discover what is become of mr.
park, and ascertain whether he is dead or alive; and that you would give
me a vessel to facilitate my voyage; and the governor will reward you
for so doing." he replied, "what does the governor mean to give me?" i
said, "if you render me all the assistance in your power, the governor
will give you two hundred bars." he asked me, how the governor could
give him that sum, being so far from him? i told him, the governor, it
was true, was far from him; but that i was there to represent and answer
for him. he then accepted my offer and promised me his assistance. the
king ordered a bullock to be killed for me. i staid to the end of that
moon. [footnote: september 13, 1810.]

the first [footnote: september 14, 1810. they reckon one day when the
moon is seen.] of the following moon, being the day i intended to
depart, a prince of tombuctoo came to sego, to demand a wife who had
been promised him. the king went out to meet him with a guard of six
hundred men, almost naked and well armed. the prince said, that being a
friend of his father (manchong), he thought it his duty to come and let
him know of his coming to take the wife promised him; the king replied,
"why have you permitted the people of your country to plunder one my
caravans, [footnote: my landlord lost his share in that caravan; seven
hundred gros of gold and a slave.] and why did you not prevent it, and
why did you yourself plunder another, belonging also to me?" the king
left the prince out, and returned to his house with the guards, after
unloading their muskets. the prince went to his lodging. he reflected
how critically he was situated, and that by his bad behaviour, the wife
which he had once been promised, had been given to another; and that the
people of the caravan he had plundered, had been before the king and
there had denounced him; and that his life was at stake. he immediately
sent three horses to the king, and half a piece of cotor [footnote: so
in the ms. of this translation.] to all the chiefs present.

next day the ambassadors of giocha came together with the ambassadors of
tiguing-coro. the day after the king went to impebara. i next day went
to meet him there. after staying there nine days, and hearing nothing, i
was much displeased; some one went to the king and told him that i was
angry, and was about to depart. he sent to tell me he was going to
banangcoro, and that i should go with him; he did depart from
banangcoro, but i staid; he sent me a courier to order me near him. i
went to banangcoro, and lodged with inche, the king's slave and
confident. the motive of the king's journey was to see one of his
children. he has six now living: and three he had destroyed. the custom
is when a male child of the king's wives is born on a friday, that the
throat should be cut; which is done immediately. the king sent for me. i
went to him at ten a.m.; he ordered part of the presents to be brought
before him; which was done, and among which were the hogs. [footnote:
the remaining hog died shortly after my arrival at sego.] they were left
loose before him and pleased him much.

on the next day (friday) he gave me a canoe with three hands
(fishermen), and i departed on my voyage after mr. park the following
tide; we passed ten villages, and arrived at supper time at sansanding,
[footnote: this village is two days journey by land from banangcoro.]
where we slept; departed by land at three p.m. and arrived at sunset at
madina, and lodged with alihou. i found there amadi fatouma, [footnote:
amadou fatooma.] the very guide i had recommended to mr. park, and who
went with him on his voyage from sansanding. i sent for him; he came
immediately. i demanded of him a faithful account of what had happened
to mr. park. on seeing me, and hearing me mention mr. park, he began to
weep; and his first words were, "they are all dead." i said, "i am come
to see after you, and intended to look every way for you, to know the
truth from your own mouth, how they died." he said that they were lost
for ever, and it was useless to make any further enquiry after them; for
to look after what was irrecoverably lost, was losing time to no
purpose. i told him i was going back to sansanding, and requested he
would come the next day there to meet me, to which he agreed. i went to
sansanding and slept there; next day i sent back the canoe to impebara.
amadi fatouma came at the appointed time to meet me, being the 21st day
of the moon. [footnote: 4th october, 1810.] i desired he would let me
know what passed to his knowledge concerning mr. park.




amadi fatouma's journal.


we departed from sansanding in a canoe the 27th [footnote: this journal
mentions no moon nor year.] day of the moon, and went in two days to
sellee, [footnote: called siila in mr. park's first voyage.] where mr.
park ended his first voyage. mr. park bought a slave to help him in the
navigation of the canoe. there was mr. park, martyn, three other white
men, three slaves and myself as guide and interpreter; nine in number,
to navigate the canoe: without landing we bought the slave. we went in
two days to ginne. we gave the chief one piece of baft and went on. in
passing sibby, [footnote: here no mention is made of times. called
dibbie in the plan.] three canoes came after us, armed with pikes,
lances, bows and arrows, &c. but no fire-arms. being sure of their
hostile intentions, we ordered them to go back; but to no effect; and
were obliged to repulse them by force. passed on; we passed rakbara;
[footnote: called kabra in the plan.] three came up to stop our passage,
which we repelled by force. on passing tombuctoo we were again attacked
by three canoes; which we beat off, always killing many of the natives.
on passing gouroumo seven canoes came after us; which we likewise beat
off. we lost one white man by sickness; we were reduced to eight hands;
having each of us fifteen muskets, always in order and ready for action.
passed by a village (of which i have forgotten the name), the residence
of king gotoijege; after passing which we counted sixty canoes coming
after us, which we repulsed, and killed a great number of men. seeing so
many men killed, and our superiority over them, i took hold of martyn's
hand, saying, "martyn, let us cease firing; for we have killed too many
already"; on which martyn wanted to kill me, had not mr. park
interfered. after passing gotoijege a long way, we met a very strong
army on one side of the river; composed of the poul nation; they had no
beasts of any kind. we passed on the other side and went on without
hostilities.

on going along we struck on the rocks. an hippopotamus rose near us, and
had nearly overset the canoe; we fired on the animal and drove it away.
after a great deal of trouble we got off the canoe without any material
danger. we came to an anchor before kaffo, and passed the day there. we
had in the canoe before we departed from sansanding, a very large stock
of provisions, salted and fresh of all kinds; which enabled us to go
along without stopping at any place, for fear of accident. the canoe was
large enough to contain with ease one hundred and twenty people. in the
evening we started and came to before an island; we saw on shore a great
quantity of hippopotami; on our approach they went into the water in
such confusion, that they almost upset our canoe. we passed the island
and sailed. in the morning three canoes from kaffo came after us, which
we beat off. we came to near a small island, and saw some of the
natives; i was sent on shore to buy some milk. when i got among them i
saw two canoes go on board to sell fresh provisions, such as fowls,
rice, &c. one of the natives wanted to kill me; at last he took hold of
me, and said i was his prisoner. mr. park seeing what was passing on
shore, suspected the truth. he stopped the two canoes and people,
telling the people belonging to them, that if they should kill me, or
keep me prisoner on shore, he would kill them all and carry their canoes
away with him. those on shore suspecting mr. park's intentions, sent me
off in another canoe on board; they were then released. after which we
bought some provisions from them, and made them some presents.

a short time after our departure, twenty canoes came after us from the
same place; on coming near, they hailed and said, "amadi fatouma, how
can you pass through our country without giving us any thing." i
mentioned what they had said to mr. park; and he gave them a few grains
of amber and some trinkets, and they went back peaceably. on coming to a
shallow part of the river, we saw on the shore a great many men sitting
down; coming nearer to them they stood up; we presented our muskets to
them, which made them run off to the interior. a little farther on we
came to a very difficult passage. the rocks had barred the river; but
three passages were still open between them. on coming near one of them,
we discovered the same people again, standing on the top of a large
rock; which caused great uneasiness to us, especially to me, and i
seriously promised never to pass there again without making considerable
charitable donations to the poor. we returned and went to a pass of less
danger, where we passed unmolested.

we came to before carmasse, and gave the chief one piece of baft. we
went on and anchored before gourinon. mr. park sent me on shore with
forty thousand cowries to buy provisions. i went and bought rice,
onions, fowls, milk, &c. and departed late in the evening. the chief of
the village sent a canoe after us, to let us know of a large army
encamped on the top of a very high mountain, waiting for us; and that we
had better return, or be on our guard. we immediately came to an anchor,
and spent there the rest of the day, and all the night. we started in
the morning; on passing the above-mentioned mountain, we saw the army,
composed of moors, with horses and camels; but without any fire-arms. as
they said nothing to us, we passed on quietly, and entered the country
of haoussa, and came to an anchor. mr. park said to me, "now, amadi, you
are at the end of your journey; i engaged you to conduct me here; you
are going to leave me, but before you go, you must give me the names of
the necessaries of life, &c. in the language of the countries through
which i am going to pass;" to which i agreed, and we spent two days
together about it, without landing. during our voyage i was the only one
who had landed. we departed and arrived at yaour.

i was sent on shore the next morning with a musket and a sabre, to carry
to the chief of the village, also with three pieces of white baft for
distribution. i went and gave the chief his present: i also gave one
piece to alhagi, one to alhagi-biron, and the other to a person whose
name i forget, all marabous. the chief gave us a bullock, a sheep, three
jars of honey, and four men's loads of rice. mr. park gave me seven
thousand cowries, and ordered me to buy provisions, which i did; he told
me to go to the chief and give him five silver rings, some powder and
flints, and tell him that these presents were given to the king
[footnote: the king staid a few hundred yards from the river.] by the
white men, who were taking leave of him before they went away. after the
chief had received these things, he enquired if the white men intended
to come back. mr. park being informed of this enquiry, replied that he
could not return any more. [footnote: these words occasioned his death;
for the certainty of mr. park's not returning induced the chief to
withhold the presents from the king.] mr. park had paid me for my voyage
before we left sansanding: i said to him, "i agreed to carry you into
the kingdom of haoussa; we are now in haoussa. i have fulfilled my
engagements with you; i am therefore going to leave you here and
return."

next day (saturday) mr. park departed, and i slept in the village
(yaour). next morning, i went to the king to pay my respects to him; on
entering the house i found two men who came on horseback; they were sent
by the chief of yaour. they said to the king, "we are sent by the chief
of yaour to let you know that the white men went away, without giving
you or him (the chief) any thing; they have a great many things with
them, and we have received nothing from them; and this amadou fatouma
now before you is a bad man, and has likewise made a fool of you both."
the king immediately ordered me to be put in irons; which was
accordingly done, and every thing i had taken from me; some were for
killing me, and some for preserving my life. the next morning early the
king sent an army to a village called boussa near the river side. there
is before this village a rock across the whole breadth of the river. one
part of the rocks is very high; there is a large opening in that rock in
the form of a door, which is the only passage for the water to pass
through; the tide current is here very strong. this army went and took
possession of the top of this opening. mr. park came there after the
army had posted itself; he nevertheless attempted to pass. the people
began to attack him, throwing lances, pikes, arrows and stones. mr. park
defended himself for a long time; two of his slaves at the stern of the
canoe were killed; they threw every thing they had in the canoe into the
river, and kept firing; but being overpowered by numbers and fatigue,
and unable to keep up the canoe against the current, and no probability
of escaping, mr. park took hold of one of the white men, and jumped into
the water; martyn did the same, and they were drowned in the stream in
attempting to escape. the only slave remaining in the boat, seeing the
natives persist in throwing weapons at the canoe without ceasing, stood
up and said to them, "stop throwing now, you see nothing in the canoe,
and nobody but myself, therefore cease. take me and the canoe, but don't
kill me." they took possession of the canoe and the man, and carried
them to the king.

i was kept in irons three months; the king released me and gave me a
slave (woman). i immediately went to the slave taken in the canoe, who
told me in what manner mr. park and all of them had died, and what i
have related above. i asked him if he was sure nothing had been found in
the canoe after its capture; he said that nothing remained in the canoe
but himself and a sword-belt. i asked him where the sword-belt was; he
said the king took it, and had made a girth for his horse with it.




isaaco's journal in continuation.


i immediately sent a poule to yaour to get me the belt by any means and
at any price, and any thing else he could discover belonging to mr.
park. i left madina and went to sansanding, and from thence to sego. on
my arrival i went to dacha, the king, and related to him the above
facts. he said he would have gone himself to destroy that country, if it
had not been so far. he gathered an army and went with it to banangcoro.
i followed him there. he ordered the army to go and destroy the kingdom
of haoussa. the army went away, passed tombuctoo a long way, and made a
halt at sacha; and dispatched a courier back to the king, to let him
know where they were, and that haoussa was at too great a distance for
an army to go, without running many dangers of all kinds. the king
ordered them to go to massina, a small country belonging to the poule
nation, to take away all the poules' cattle, and return. they did so,
and brought with them a great many cattle. the vanguard came with the
cattle after a voyage of three months; and the army came one month
after, which made four months they had been out. the king was much
displeased with the chiefs' conduct, and wanted to punish them for not
going where he sent them; but they observed that they went as far as
they possibly could; that the distance was too great and would have
destroyed an army; and that prudence and the hardships they had already
sustained, had dictated the necessity of returning, though very contrary
to their inclinations. we all returned to sego.

i went back to sansanding and staid there, waiting for the arrival of
the poule i had sent to yaour. four months after he came back, having
been eight months on his voyage, and having suffered greatly. he brought
me the belt; and said that he had bribed a young slave girl belonging to
the king, who had stole it from him; and that he could not get any thing
more, as nothing else was to be found which had belonged to mr. park or
his companions.

i went to sego and informed the king of what i had got belonging to mr.
park, and that i was going to senegal immediately. the king was desirous
that i should spend the rainy season with him. i said i could not stay;
as the object of my mission was attained, i wished to go as soon as
possible. amadi fatouma being a good, honest, and upright man, i had
placed him with mr. park; what he related to me being on his oath,
having no interest, nor any hopes of reward whatever: nothing remaining
of mr. park or his effects; the relations of several travellers who had
passed the same country, agreeing with amadou's journal; being certain
of the truth of what he had said, and of the dangers i should have run
to no purpose in such a distant part; all these reasons induced me to
proceed no farther. after obtaining the belt, i thought it best to
return to senegal.

_further intelligence from isaaco._

isaaco says that mr. park gave him his papers to carry to gambia to
robert ainsley, with an order on robert ainsley for ten bars. that mr.
park went away from sansanding with amadi fatouma, in his presence; that
he cannot tell precisely the date, but that mr. park died four months
after his departure from sansanding, which date may be nearly taken from
the date of mr. park's papers brought by him (isaaco) to robert ainsley.
that mr. park had lost all his companions but four men. he arrived at
foolah dougou with thirty-three white men, and from foolah dougou to
sego (which was eight days march, but which is generally performed in
three days by a negro) they lost twenty-six men by rains, the damps, &c.
mr. park went away from sansanding, with four men, and he himself making
five.



