
a columbian autograph souvenir cookery book.

over three hundred autograph recipes, and twenty-three portraits,
contributed specially by the board of lady managers of the world's
columbian exposition


compiled by carrie v. shuman, chicago, 1893


favorite dishes is due to the fact that the noble women who have
labored for the best interests of mankind and womankind, in the
development of the women's department of the world's columbian
exposition, found time to contribute this collection of recipes, as a
means of enabling the compiler to open an additional avenue for women
to provide the necessary funds to pay the expenses of a visit to the
exposition.

the compiler is most happy to congratulate the lady managers and lady
alternates of every state and territory of the united states,
including alaska, upon the fact that their prompt responses to the
statement of the object of this publication bring them together in
this place as the exponents of the art of cookery, at this stage of
its best development in this country, and as cheerful assistants of
women who need the encouragement and blessings of their more fortunate
sisters.

it is to be regretted that all of the letters of commendation cannot
be published, but as they would alone constitute a fair sized volume,
only a few have been inserted.




tea


tastes differ as to which of the many kinds of tea is the best, and
yet the general use of english breakfast and oolong warrants the
recommending of these two teas as standard. the chinese have taught us
the correct idea of tea drinking; to have it always freshly made, with
the water boiling, and to steep the leaves at table.

the tea table can be easily equipped now with a boiler in silver or
brass, with alcohol lamp underneath; a tea caddy in china or silver,
with teapot and cups before the hostess.

no set formula can be prescribed for quantity to each cup, but it
averages one-half teaspoon of tea leaves.

heat teapot by pouring in some hot water, let it stand a few moments
and empty in a bowl for hot water on the table. place tea leaves
required in the pot, pour in boiling water, instantly replace the lid
and let it steep a few minutes. it is then ready to serve. use a small
amount of sugar and no cream, as both cream and sugar detract from the
correct flavor of tea.

for "five o'clock tea" a "teaball" is recommended. the teaball is
convenient at all times, but especially upon an occasion when guests
are coming and going. keep the water on tea table constantly boiling
and the teaball partly filled with tea leaves. a cup of tea can then
be brewed quickly by dropping the ball into the cup, pouring boiling
water over it, holding it in the cup (slightly moving the teaball
around through the water), until the color is satisfactory to the
drinker's taste. in this way three or four cups of tea can be served
quickly and the flavor of the tea leaves preserved. if agreeable to
the taste, a slice of lemon can be added to each cup and a few drops
of arrack to make tea _ la russe_.




chocolate


to make good chocolate is not easy. one's own taste must be the guide
regarding strength. soften and smooth the chocolate with cold water in
a jar on the range; pour in boiling water, then add milk, stirring
constantly. serve as soon as it boils. when each cup is filled with
the chocolate, place two tablespoons of whipped cream on top.




cocoa


cocoa has the same flavor as chocolate, but it is richer and more
oily.

when made from the ground it can be prepared at the table, but it is
better boiled a short time in water and thinned with hot milk.

made from the shells it requires a longer boiling. first wet two
ounces of the cocoa shells with a little cold water and pour over them
one quart of boiling water. boil for one hour and a half; strain and
add one quart of milk, also a few drops of the essence of vanilla.

when it comes to a boil take immediately from the fire and serve.




coffee


the standard mixture of coffee is java and mocha; two-thirds java and
one-third mocha, the former giving the strength, the latter the
flavor. after roasting it should be kept in an air-tight can. grind
only so much each time as may be required. to one cupful of ground
coffee add one beaten egg and four tablespoons of cold water; mix
thoroughly in coffee pot and pour in one quart of boiling water. stir
the coffee until it boils, then place it on the back of the stove
where it will simmer for ten minutes. add a dash of cold water; wait a
moment, then pour off carefully into silver coffee pot, which has been
standing with hot water in it. filippini's recipe for black coffee is
as follows: "take six scant tablespoonfuls of coffee beans and grind
them in a mill. have a well cleaned french coffee pot; put the coffee
on the filter with the small strainer over, then pour on a pint and a
half of boiling water, little by little, recollecting at the same time
that too much care cannot be taken to have the water boiling
thoroughly. when all the water is consumed, put on the cover and let
it infuse slightly, but on no account must it boil. serve in six
after-dinner  cups. coffee should never be prepared more than five
minutes  before the time to serve."




bread


steamed brown bread. (a la oakland farm.)

from mrs. virginia c. meredith, of indiana, vice chairman executive
committee, and lady manager.

_it gives me great pleasure to send you an excellent recipe for
steamed brown bread for your colombian autograph cook book.

i have great sympathy with your plan, and sincerely hope that the
ladies of our board will respond cheerfully to your requests. very
sincerely,_

one cupful of sweet milk; one cupful of sour milk; two cupfuls of corn
meal; one cupful of wheat flour; one-half cupful of new orleans
molasses; one teaspoonful of soda. steam three hours.


light bread.

from mrs. governor james p. eagle, of arkansas, president of state
board and lady manager.

take one teacup of _boiling water_; stir in corn meal to make a
stiff mush; let stand over night in moderately warm place. then take
one cup of _fresh milk_ and one of warm water and heat together
to a simmer and add to this the prepared mush, one tablespoonful of
sugar and one teaspoonful of salt. to these ingredients add a little
flour at a time, until you make a stiff batter. place all in a milk-
warm vessel of water, place near fire and keep warm until it rises--
about six hours. to this yeast add flour to make a stiff dough, using
one tablespoon of lard and a little salt. keep warm till it rises and
bake about an hour and a half.


franklin gems.

from mrs. l. m. n. stevens, of maine, lady manager.

mix one-half pint of milk and one-half pint water, into which stir
franklin flour until about as thick as pancakes. pour into a very hot,
well buttered gem pan and bake in a quick oven.


baking powder biscuit.

from mrs. rollin a. edgerton, of arkansas, secretary of state board,
and lady manager.

to one quart of flour add two teaspoons of baking powder, one more of
salt, and a tablespoon of lard; mix with sweet milk sufficient to roll
out on board without sticking; cut with biscuit tin and bake quickly
in hot oven.


french rolls.

from mrs. sallie howard bush, of alabama, alternate lady manager

one and one-half lbs. of flour; four oz. of butter; one-half teacup of
sweet milk; one-half cake of yeast; one teaspoonful of salt; four eggs
beaten very light and added last. set to rise and bake as other rolls.


risen muffins.

one quart of flour; one pint of sweet milk; one cake of yeast; three
eggs; one teaspoonful of butter and one of sugar; one teaspoonful of
salt. the yeast must be dissolved in a little of the milk. if desired
for breakfast, they must be made the night before; if for tea, set
them to rise about 11 o'clock in the morning. when well risen, put
them in the tin muffin rings that come especially for them and place
in a moderately warm position, letting them stand about an hour before
putting in to bake.


breakfast rolls.

from miss meta telfair mclaws, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

take one-half cake of best yeast and dissolve in half a cup of tepid
water. pour this on some sifted flour--about half a pint in quantity--
to which must be added more tepid water (or milk, if you like) until a
thick batter is produced. add to this batter a pinch of salt and a
little sugar. cover well with a thick cloth and set in a warm place to
rise. in the morning add lard and enough flour to make a stiff dough.
now make into roll shape and arrange them in a tin pan. set the rolls
under the stove or near it until they rise again, before putting them
in the oven to bake. rolls should be made of best flour and the batter
should be put in some earthen vessel when set to rise.


pocket-book rolls.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

one pint milk; one-half pint boiling water; salt and flour enough to
make a sponge; one-half cake of compressed yeast. rise for about two
hours. then add the white of one egg (beaten); mixed butter and lard
the size of an egg; one teaspoonful sugar. stiffen with flour; make
out into thick sheets of dough; cut out with a circular cutter; fold
one edge of the biscuit, so cut, toward the center, putting a small
piece of butter under the overlapping edge of dough. put biscuit in
pans to rise, and when light, bake in a quick oven.


potato rolls.

from mrs. theo. f. armstrong, of delaware, alternate lady manager.

one and one-half teacup of mashed white potatoes; one-half teacup of
melted lard; one and one-half teaspoon of salt; one teacup of yeast;
two eggs; one tablespoon of sugar. this is the sponge. set to rise
about nine o'clock in the morning; when light, put in enough flour to
make a soft dough; then let it rise again; when light, roll out thick
and cut in round cakes; put in pan and lighten again; bake in quick
oven.


graham gems.

from mrs. louise campbell, of new mexico, alternate lady manager.

four cups graham flour; one tablespoon of sugar; pinch of salt; one
teaspoon of soda, which dissolve in buttermilk; mix with buttermilk
into a stiff batter; put into hot gem irons and bake in a quick oven.


corn cake.

from miss hattie t. hundley, of alabama, lady manager.

one pint of milk; half a pint of indian meal; four eggs; a scant
tablespoonful of butter; salt; and one teaspoonful of sugar. pour the
milk boiling on the sifted meal. when cold, add the butter (melted),
the salt, the sugar, the yolks of the eggs, and, lastly, the whites,
well beaten. bake half an hour in a hot oven. it is very nice baked in
iron or tin gem pans, the cups an inch and a half deep.--_mrs.
henderson's cook book._


bachelors' corn pone.

from mrs. mary b. p. black, of west virginia, alternate lady manager.

one pint sifted corn meal; one pint buttermilk (or other sour milk or
cream); two eggs, beaten separately; tablespoonful of butter and lard
(half and half); little salt, and scant teaspoonful baking soda. pour
the buttermilk into the sifted corn meal, stirring until smooth,
retaining a small quantity (half teacupful) of buttermilk to dissolve
soda; add yolks of eggs, well beaten; then soda, having dissolved the
same in the retained buttermilk, mixing well, while it effervesces;
then lard and butter, either melted or cut into shreds; lastly, white
of eggs, beaten to stiff froth. bake in shallow pan, 20 or 25 minutes.


corn bread.

from mrs. t. j. butler, of arizona, lady manager.

one cup of corn meal; one half cup of sugar; one cup of sweet milk;
one and one-half spoonfuls baking powder; flour enough to make a stiff
batter. bake in a quick oven.


corn meal muffins.

from mrs. parthenia p. rue, of california, lady manager.

one teacupful of corn meal; one and one-half teacupfuls of flour; two
teaspoonfuls yeast powder; two tablespoonfuls sugar; one tablespoonful
of butter; one and one-half teacupfuls of milk; one egg or two yolks
of eggs.


baked corn bread.

from mrs. minna g. hooker, of vermont, alternate lady manager.

one teacup cream; one-quarter teaspoon soda; one cup flour; butter
size of a walnut; one cup sugar; one cup indian meal; one egg.
granulated meal is the best.


steamed brown bread.

from mrs. e. v. mcconnell, of north dakota, lady manager.

two cups corn meal; one cup flour; two cups sweet milk; one cup sour
milk; two-thirds cup molasses; two teaspoons (even) soda; one
tablespoon salt. steam constantly for three hours.


raised brown bread.

from mrs. ellen m. chandler, of vermont, lady manager

three pints corn meal; two pints shorts, or coarse flour; three-
quarters cup yeast; one and one-half cups molasses; one and one-
eighth quarts warm water. let rise until it cracks on top. steam six
hours and bake slowly one hour. if wheat shorts cannot be procured,
use one pint rye and one and one-half pints graham flour.


boston brown bread.

from mrs. governor james p. eagle, of arkansas, president of state
board, and lady manager.

one pint of bread sponge; one cup of warm water; three-fourths cup of
molasses, in which is stirred one-half teaspoon of soda: one large
teaspoonful of salt. stir in sufficient quantity of graham flour to
make a stiff batter, put in mould and let rise till quite light and
then bake in moderate oven one hour.


strawberry short cake.

from mrs. governor edwin c. burleigh, of maine, second vice president,
board of lady managers.

mix a dough nearly as you would for cream-tartar biscuits, only put
considerable shortening in. roll thin; bake in a pan; when done, split
it and put the berries (mashed in sugar) between. whipped cream over
the top makes it very nice.


strawberry short cake.

from mrs. augusta truman, of california, alternate lady
manager-at-large.

hull and rinse one quart of perfectly ripe berries; put in a bowl with
one large cup of granulated sugar; cut--do not mash--with a silver
spoon and set away in the ice-box for two hours. make a rich biscuit
dough, adding double quantity of butter; roll out one inch thick and
bake in a deep pie-plate. when done, split quickly with a silver
knife, using the knife as little as possible; spread the berries on
the lower section and cover with the upper; sift on some fine sugar
and serve immediately, as this recipe is for hot short cake.


orange short cake.

from mrs. m.d. owings, of washington, lady manager.

orange shortcake is very nice. the only difficulty to overcome in
making this toothsome dish is to get rid of the white fibers which
intersect the pulp of the orange, and this is, after all, a very easy
matter. to prepare the oranges, simply cut them in half, without
peeling, and take out the lobes precisely as when eating an orange
with a spoon. the shortcake is mode like very short, soft biscuit and
baked in a round tin in a quick oven. when it is done, split it,
sprinkle sugar over the prepared oranges, put a layer on the under
crust, replace the upper part, upon which put more of the prepared
oranges and serve at once with cream.


sally lunn.

from mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe, of arkansas, alternate lady manager.

one pint of milk; three eggs, well beaten; salt; one large spoon of
butter; half a teacup of yeast, and as much flour as will make a thick
batter. pour into a cake pan and place in a warm spot to rise. bake in
moderate oven. when done, cut with sharp knife crosswise twice,
pouring over each part drawn butter. replacing the parts, cut then
like cake, serving at once while hot. this is a great favorite with
southerners.


ham toast.

from mrs. rosine ryan, of. texas, lady manager-at-large.

_your enterprise commends itself to every woman who has the best
interests of her sex uppermost in her thoughts.

among the happy recollections of my childhood, luncheon ham toast
stands out temptingly clear. it was my mother's own, and i give it in
preference to several others that occur to me. most cordially yours,

boil a quarter of a pound of _lean_ ham; chop it very fine; beat
into it the yolks of three eggs, half an ounce of butter and two
tablespoonfuls of cream; add a little cayenne; stir it briskly over
the fire until it thickens; spread on hot toast; garnish with curled
parsley.


oat meal

from mrs. george huxworth, of arizona, alternate lady manager.

dampen the meal, put it in a thin cloth and steam for thirty minutes.
keeps its flavor much better than when boiled.


brewis.

from mrs. frances e. hale, of wyoming, lady manager.

take half a loaf of boston brown bread; break in small pieces; put in
an oatmeal kettle and cover with milk; boil to a smooth paste, about
the consistency of oatmeal. eat hot, with sugar and cream. nice
breakfast dish.


sandwich dressing.

from mrs. mariam d. cooper, of montana, alternate lady manager.

mix two tablespoons mustard with enough hot water to make smooth;
three tablespoons olive oil; very little red or white pepper; salt;
yolk of one egg; mix with hand and net aside to cool; warm to spread.




oysters


blue points are the only proper oysters to serve for luncheon or
dinner. they should always be served in the deep shell, and if
possible upon "oyster plates," but may be neatly served upon cracked
ice, covered with a small napkin, in soup plates. the condiments are
salt, pepper, cayenne, tabasco sauce, and horse radish. a quarter of
lemon is also properly served with each plate, but the gourmet prefers
salt, pepper, and horse radish, as the acid of lemon does violence to
the delicious flavor of the freshly-opened bivalve. clams should be
served in precisely the same way.




bouillon


bouillon is made of beef, and must be rich and nutritious. take ten
pounds of good clear beef cut from the middle part of the round. wipe
and cut the meat into pieces. put this into one gallon of water and
heat slowly; skim just as the water begins to boil. when this is done
place the pot where it will simmer slowly for five or six hours. one
hour before removing add two blades of celery, ten pepper corns, six
cloves, small stick of cinnamon, and salt. should one prefer it plain,
do not put in the spices. strain and cool. before using, take off all
fat. it is then ready to heat and serve in cups for luncheons and
teas.




soup


the foundation of all excellent soup is a stock made from beef. for a
dinner company heavy soup is not so desirable as a good, clear, rich
soup, and i add a tried recipe from "practical cooking and dinner
giving," called:


amber soup.

a large soup bone (two pounds); a chicken; a small slice of ham; a
soup bunch (or an onion, two sprigs of parsley, half a small carrot,
half a small parsnip, half a stick of celery); three cloves; pepper;
salt; a gallon of cold water; whites and shells of two eggs, and
caramel for coloring. let the beef, chicken and ham boil slowly for
five hours, add the vegetables and cloves, to cook the last hour,
having fried the onion in a little hot fat and then in it stuck the
cloves. strain the soup into an earthen bowl and let it remain over
night. next day remove the cake of fat on top; take out the jelly,
avoid the settlings; and mix into it the beaten whites of the eggs
with the shells. boil quickly for half a minute; then, removing the
kettle, skim off carefully all the scum and whites of the eggs from
the top, not stirring the soup itself. pass through a jelly bag, when
it should be very dear. reheat just before serving, and add then a
tablespoonful of caramel to give a rich color and flavor.

_caramel_--take a cup of sugar and a tablespoon of water. put in
a porcelain kettle and stir constantly to prevent burning, until it
has a bright brown color. then add a cup of water, pinch of salt; let
it boil a few moments longer, cool, strain, and put away in a close-
corked bottle--and it is always ready for coloring the soup.


mock-turtle soup.

from mrs. beriah wilkins, of district of columbia, fifth vice
president, board of lady managers.

this soup should be prepared the day before it is to be served up. one
calf's head, well cleaned and washed. lay the head in the bottom of a
large pot. one onion; six cloves; ten allspice; one bunch parsley; one
carrot; salt to taste; cover with four quarts of water. boil three
hours, or until the flesh will slip easily from the bones; take out
the head; chop the meat and tongue very fine; set aside the brains;
remove the soup from the fire; strain carefully and set away until the
next day. an hour before dinner take off all fat and set on as much of
the stock to warm as you need. when it boils drop in a few squares of
the meat you have reserved, as well as the force balls. to prepare
these, rub the yolk of three hard boiled eggs to a paste in a wooden
bowl, adding gradually the brains to moisten them; also a little
butter; mix with these two eggs, beaten light; flour your hands; make
this paste into small balls; drop them into the soup a few minutes
before removing from the fire. a tablespoonful of browned flour and
brown sugar for coloring; rub smooth with the same amount of butter;
let it boil up well; finish the seasoning by the addition of a glass
of sherry. serve with sliced lemon.


julienne soup.

from mrs. susan r. ashley, of colorado, sixth vice president, board of
lady managers.

the day before needed, put two pounds of beef cut from the lower part
of the round, into two quarts of cold water and let come slowly to the
boil, skimming carefully until perfectly clear. when this point is
reached, add a small onion, two stalks of celery, two cloves, and keep
at the boiling point for seven hours; then strain into an earthen bowl
and let cool until next day. a half hour before needed, skim off all
the fat, add pepper and salt to taste; also a half pint of mixed
vegetables which have been cooked in salted water and cut in uniform
dice shape. let come to a boil, and serve.


noodle soup.

from mrs. frona eunice wait, of california, alternate lady manager.

to make a good stock for noodle soup, take a small shank of beef, one
of mutton, and another of veal; have the bones cracked and boil them
together for twenty-four hours. put with them two good sized potatoes,
a carrot, a turnip, an onion, and some celery. salt and pepper to
taste. if liked, a bit of bay leaf may be added. when thoroughly well-
done, strain through a colander and set aside until required for use.
for the noodles, use one egg for an ordinary family, and more in
proportion to quantity required. break the eggs into the flour, add a
little salt, and mix into a rather stiff dough. roll very thin and cut
into fine bits. let them dry for two hours, then drop them into the
boiling stock about ten minutes before serving.


corn soup.

from mrs. m.d. thatcher, of colorado, lady manager.

one large fowl, or four pounds of veal (the knuckle or neck will do).
put over fire in one gallon of cold water, without salt. cover tightly
and simmer slowly, until the meat will slip from the bones, not
allowing it to boil all the strength out, as the meat can be made into
a nice dish for breakfast or luncheon, by reserving a cupful of the
liquor to put with it in a mince on toast, or a stew. strain the soup
to remove all bones and bits of meat. grate one dozen ears of green
corn, scraping cobs to remove the heart of the kernel (or one can, if
prepared corn be used). add corn to soup, with salt, pepper and a
little parsley, and simmer slowly half an hour. just before serving,
add a tablespoonful of flour, beaten very thoroughly with a tablespoon
of butter. serve  very hot.


celery soup.

from mrs. alice b. castleman, of kentucky, alternate lady manager.

put a veal bone to boil in one quart of water. after skimming it well,
put in one pint of celery cut up very fine, two tablespoonfuls of
rice, one onion, one teaspoonful of celery salt. let this boil  till
reduced to a pint. take out the meat and pass the soup through a
colander, mashing and extracting as much of the puree as possible,
passing the stock through it two or three times. boil a quart of milk
separately; rub two tablespoonfuls of flour in a half a cup of butter;
add this to the boiled milk; after cooking it a few minutes, add the
milk to the celery puree and serve at once, mixing milk and puree
well.

oyster soup.

from mrs. helen c. brayton, of south carolina, vice president of state
board, and lady manager.

take one hundred oysters and simmer in their liquor with allspice. as
the scum rises skim carefully. strain off the liquor and add to it
three-quarters lb. butter and one-quarter lb. flour, rubbed to a
cream. let this boil and carefully stir in a quart of milk, guarding
against curdling and pour over the oysters.


bisque of crab or crawfish.

from mrs. belle h. perkins, of louisiana, president of state board,
lady manager.

boil one dozen crabs; pick them in flaky pieces as much as possible;
remove the meat from the claws and the fat from the back. reserve some
of the nicest pieces and put them aside for the soup after it is done.
boil a chicken or veal bone; put it into two quarts of cold water; let
it come to a boil and skim well, adding a cup of rice; let all boil
together until the ingredients are reduced to one quart; add an onion,
a piece of celery (or a teaspoon of celery salt); pass the stock and
rice, together with the other parts of the crab, through a sieve; mash
the chicken or veal bone well, and add some of the stock. mash again
and scrape from the bottom of the sieve, obtaining all the puree
possible; add this to the broth, together with the meat of the crabs.
let a pint of sweet cream come to a boil, adding it to the soup just
as it is being served; also two tablespoons of butter, celery salt and
pepper.


potato puree.

from mrs. james r. deane, of california, lady manager.

two pounds potatoes; two ounces butter; two tablespoonfuls chopped
onions; two tablespoonfuls chopped celery; one quart milk; one quart
boiling water; one-half cupful sago; one-half teaspoonful pepper; one
teaspoonful salt. wash, peel and slice potatoes, onions and celery.
melt the butter and add it to the vegetables, stirring it for five
minutes to keep it from browning or burning. then add the boiling
water. when the vegetables are soft, rub them through a sieve; add the
milk, and when the soup is boiling, add the sago, a little at a time,
and cook until the sago looks clear. stir the soup well and add
seasoning the last.


asparagus soup.

from mrs. laura p. coleman, of colorado, lady manager.

two quarts veal stock; two bunches asparagus; two cloves; two onions;
three pepper corns; a little parsley. boil one hour and strain, then
add one pint whipped cream. after dished, season with salt to taste.
tapioca or celery may be substituted for asparagus.


tomato soup.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

one quart of canned tomatoes; one quart of boiling water; one small
onion; one carrot; celery and parsley; one teaspoonful salt. boil
slowly for three hours and strain. add two tablespoonfuls sugar, one
tablespoonful butter, two tablespoonfuls flour made into a paste with
water and used as thickening.


tomato soup.

from mrs. e. j. p. howes, of michigan, lady manager.

take one-half dozen fresh tomatoes or a pint of canned, and stew a
half hour in a pint of water; strain through a colander; put the
liquid on the fire; stir in a teaspoonful of soda; then add a pint of
heated milk; season with a little butter (a dessertspoonful); salt and
pepper to taste, and bring the whole to a boiling heat and serve hot.


gumbo fil

from mrs. anna m. fosdick, of alabama, lady manager.

cut up a chicken; sprinkle with flour, and fry in the vessel in which
the gumbo is to be made. when the chicken is nearly done, chop an
onion and fry with it. pour on this three quarts of boiling water, and
let all boil slowly till the flesh leaves the bones of the chicken.
then add the liquor from the oysters, two tablespoonfuls of tomato
catchup, and salt and pepper to taste. let this boil a short time;
then add one hundred oysters. do not allow them to boil more than two
minutes. remove the vessel from the fire, and before pouring into the
tureen, sprinkle in two tablespoonfuls of fil. serve always with
rice.

_to prepare fil for gumbo_.--gather sassafras leaves, as late as
possible in the season, before they turn red. dry them in the shade
and open air. when perfectly dry, pound thorn, sift the powder and
bottle it keep tightly corked.


gumbo soup.

from mrs. virginia t. smith, of connecticut, alternate lady manager.

fry three rather thin slices of salted pork; and three large onions in
the some fat. fry also a chicken of medium size, after which put pork,
onions, chicken and a half pound of _lean_ ham, into a dinner
kettle containing four quarts of boiling water. when the mixture
begins to boil, add one quart of gumbo, the corn cut from two ears,
three tomatoes, and two very small red peppers. add boiling water as
it needs and cook slowly five or six hours, after which strain and
serve with bread "crunchers" cut in dice.


chicken gumbo with oysters.

from mrs. alice b. castleman, of kentucky, alternate lady manager.

take a young chicken or a half grown one; cut up; roll it in salt,
pepper and flour, and fry it a nice brown, using lard or drippings as
if for a fricassee. cut up a quart of fresh green okra and take out
the chicken and fry the okra in the same lard. when well browned,
return the chicken to the pot and boil. add to it a large slice of
ham--a quarter of a pound will be about right for this gumbo. pour on
to the chicken, ham and okra half a gallon of boiling water and let it
boil down to three pints. ten minutes before serving, pour into the
boiling soup two dozen fine oysters, with half a pint of their liquor;
let it come to a good boil and serve with well-boiled rice._--la
cuisine creole._


okra soup.

from miss florida cuningham, of south carolina, lady manager.

two quarts of okra out very fine in three quarts of water, in which
put a large shank of beef, and boil one hour. then skim well and add
two quarts of fresh tomatoes, strained. boil slowly and without
ceasing for at least five hours. season with salt to the taste when
the tomatoes are put in, and add black and cayenne pepper when ready
to serve. keep closely covered while cooking.


black bean soup.

from mrs. m. d. foley, of nevada, lady manager.

soak one coffee cup black turtle beans over night in cold water. add
water enough in the morning to cook thoroughly. one hour before dinner
rub through a sieve and stir in three pints plain beef stock. season
with salt, pepper, and a salt spoon each of cloven and allspice. just
before serving add a wine glass of port or sherry, one small lemon
thinly sliced and one hard boiled egg chopped fine.


bean soup.

from mrs. anne b. patrick, of colorado, alternate lady manager.

take one can of boston baked beans. remove all the pork and pour over
the beans one quart of boiling water, and let it boil slowly for one
hour, adding hot water from time to time to keep up the quantity. mash
the beans thoroughly and strain through a sieve, heat again nearly to
boiling and add one pint of hot (not boiling) cream; add pepper and
salt to taste.


soup regency.

from mrs. isabella beecher hooker, of connecticut, lady manager.

the bones and remains of cold fowls, such as turkey and chicken: or
game, such as partridges, woodcock, etc.; two carrots; two small
onions; one head of celery; one turnip; one-half tea cup pearl barley;
the yolks of three eggs, boiled hard; one-quarter pint of cream; salt
to taste, and two quarts of common stock.

_mode_--place the bones and remains of the fowls in the stew pan,
with the vegetables sliced; pour over the stock and simmer for two
hours; skim off all the fat and strain it wash the barley and boil it
in two waters before adding it to the soup; finish simmering in the
soup, and when the barley is done take out half and pound the other
half with the yolks of the eggs. when well pounded, rub it through a
fine colander, add the cream and the salt, if necessary; let it boil
up once more and serve very hot, putting in the barley that was taken
out first. time of cooking, 3-1/2 hours. seasonable from september to
march. sufficient for eight persons.


pea soup.

from mrs. whiting s. clark, of iowa, lady manager.

cover a quart of green peas and a very small onion with hot water;
boil till soft enough to strain through a sieve. cream two tablespoons
of butter and one of flour and add to a quart of milk and coffee cup
of cream. boil all together and strain. stir in whipped cream and
serve with buttered toast cut in small squares.


clam chowder.

from mrs. charles h. olmstead, of georgia, lady manager.

to one pint of clams add one quart of milk, two onions, chopped fine,
two tablespoonfuls of butter, the yolks of two eggs rubbed in two
tablespoonfuls of flour, salt, parsley, cayenne pepper, half
teaspoonful allspice, four hard-boiled eggs sliced, and half pint
sherry wine added when served. cut the soft part of the clams in two
pieces; mince the tough part very fine and boil it one hour in a quart
of water before adding the soft part; after the soft part has boiled
half an hour longer, add the milk, flour and other ingredients. serve
hot.


clam chowder.

from miss lida m. russell, of nevada, lady manager.

two large onions, sliced and fried with one cup of finely chopped salt
pork. add to it three pints of boiling milk and juice of one can of
clams, in which has been cooked two large potatoes, thinly sliced; a
pinch of red pepper; salt; two tablespoonfuls of flour, rubbed smooth
with one tablespoon of melted butter. stir in clams, heat well and
serve at once.




fish


soles or smelts cooked with matre d'hotel sauce.

from mrs. james r. deane, of california, lady manager.

skin the fish and cut flesh into filets; put the skin and bones into a
saucepan with water enough to cover them; let this boil to make the
stock for the gravy. now wipe the filets dry and roll them up with the
skin side inward to make them stand firm; place the filets on a
buttered baking tin, first rolling them into bread crumbs. when ready
to cook, squeeze over each filet about a teaspoonful lemon juice and
put on each a piece of matre d'hotel butter; cover with a buttered
paper and cook about ten minutes.

_to make matre d'hotel butter_--work one tablespoonful of butter
to a cream; squeeze in the juice of one-half a lemon; one-quarter
saltspoonful cayenne; one tablespoonful finely chopped parsley. put
butter on ice to cool before using.

_sauce for this dish_--two tablespoonfuls of butter, melted; two
tablespoonfuls of flour, stirred into the butter and cook for ten
minutes. then put in a small pinch of cayenne pepper and a cupful of
fish stock and cook for ten minutes. then put in juice of one-half
lemon, a tablespoonful of finely chopped parsley, and just before
serving put in two tablespoonfuls of cream.


baked shad.

from mrs. mary r. kinder, of delaware, lady manager.

make a stuffing of bread crumbs, butter, salt, pepper, and an egg well
beaten. stuff the shad, sew it up and bake in a quick oven. serve with
_brown gravy_, mushroom, or tomato ketchup.


cubion.

from mrs. anna m. fosdick, of alabama, lady manager.

cut a red-fish or red-snapper in pieces and fry brown. while frying
the fish, in a separate vessel, cut very fine and fry, one onion and
two cloves of garlic. when brown, add two tablespoonfuls of flour, one
pint of prepared tomatoes, pepper and salt to taste, a tablespoonful
of worcestershire sauce, and half a dozen whole cloves. let this
simmer for one-half hour, then add one-half pint of wine. pour over
the fried fish, and serve immediately.


cod fish balls.

from mrs. a. m. palmer, of new york, alternate lady manager.

one pound codfish; one and a half pound potatoes; one quarter pound
butter; two eggs. boil the fish slowly, then pound with a potato
masher until _very_ fine; add the potatoes mashed  and hot; next
add butter and one-half cup milk and the two eggs. mix thoroughly,
form into balls, and fry in hot fat.


salmon croquettes.

from mrs. george w. lamar, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

one can of salmon, minced very fine; two large irish potatoes, boiled
and mashed; half of a small onion, chopped fine; two raw eggs; salt
and black pepper; two tablespoonfuls of worcestershire sauce. rub
these together until very light. make into balls, roll in cracker dust
and fry in boiling lard.




shell fish


maryland terrapins.

from mrs. william reed, of maryland, lady manager.

after bleeding them an hour, put them into warm water. a young one
will boil tender in half an hour. they are done when the shell is
easily removed. be careful not to cut off the heads before boiling, as
it will make them watery. in picking them, be careful not to break the
gall or waste the liquor. the small bones are often left in the
terrapin--if they are diamondbacks. be careful not to break the eggs.
when picked, add the liquor, and to three medium sized terrapins,
three-fourths pound of butter, salt and pepper (cayenne) to taste. let
them stew for a short time, but be careful not to stir them more than
is absolutely necessary. if you wish, one-half pint of good wine can
be added just before serving.

another way to dress terrapin is to add to the liquor of three
terrapins, three-fourths pound of butter thickened with browned flour,
cayenne pepper and salt. spices or onions are never used in maryland
to dress terrapins.


terrapin white stew.

from mrs. jambs r. deane, of california, lady manager.

two large terrapin; three tablespoonfuls butter; one pint cream; one-
half pint sherry or madeira; one gill water; six hard-boiled eggs;
one-half a lemon; two level teaspoonfuls salt; cayenne, white pepper,
mace and allspice to taste. cut up the terrapin fine; put in a stew
pan with terrapin juice, water, butter, salt, pepper and spices.
simmer for fifteen minutes. mash yolks of eggs well and mix gradually
with cream; add this mixture, with the wine, and the lemon cut in thin
slices, to the terrapin stew. cut up the whites of eggs in thin rings
and, stirring, mix thoroughly, but do not let it boil. to be served at
once.


white stew of terrapin.

from mrs. george w. lamar, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

cut off the heads and throw into cold water for about an hour to draw
the blood. scald them to loosen the skin and nails; open and clean
them. cover with water and boil, with part of an onion chopped fine,
and a sprig of parsley and thyme. when thoroughly done, remove all the
meat from the shells and bones, chop fine and return to the pot. rub
to a cream one-quarter pound of butter and one tablespoonful of flour,
with a little of the stock, and stir in gradually, adding salt and red
pepper to taste. just before serving put in one-half pint of cream and
one wineglass of wine to each terrapin. slice one lemon and four hard-
boiled eggs into a tureen, pour the stew over them and serve in
terrapin dishes.


terrapin croquettes.

from mrs. w. w. kimball, of chicago, lady manager.

take the meat of one terrapin. chop in small pieces, add a pint of
sherry and boil ten minutes; then add a quart of cream and boil again
ten minutes; add salt, cayenne pepper, a little worcestershire sauce
and two tablespoons of cream sauce. beat up yolks of  four eggs in
some cream butter and mix with the other. put in  tin moulds and place
on ice for six or eight hours until hard.  dip moulds in hot water to
loosen. take out of moulds, bread as you would oysters, and fry.


deviled lobster.

from mrs. joseph c. straughan, of idaho, lady manager.

two lobsters, each weighing about two and a half lbs.; one pint of
cream; two tablespoonfuls of butter; two of flour; one of mustard; a
speck of cayenne; salt; pepper; a scant pint of bread crumbs. open the
lobster and with a sharp knife cut the meat rather fine. be careful in
opening not to break the body or tail shells. wash these shells and
wipe dry. join them in the form of a boat, that they may hold the
prepared meat. put the cream on to boil. mix the butter, flour,
mustard, and pepper together and add three spoonfuls of the boiling
cream. stir all into the remaining cream and cook two minutes. add the
lobster, salt and pepper, and boil one minute. fill the shells with
the mixture and place in pan. cover with the bread crumbs and brown
for twenty minutes in a hot oven. serve on a long narrow dish, the
body in the centre, the tails at either end. garnish with parsley.


lobster croquettes.

from mrs. louise l. barton, of idaho, alternate lady manager.

one pint chopped lobsters; good half pint rolled crackers; one
tablespoonful butter; ten of milk; salt and pepper to taste. this
quantity is enough for twelve persons.


deviled crabs.

from mrs. cora l. bartlett, of new mexico, lady manager.

take butter the size of an egg; melt slowly in sauce-pan; into butter
slice fine a piece of onion size of a filbert; brown slowly. sift into
above, tablespoonful of flour and cream carefully; heat a generous
half pint of milk and stir into butter and flour. take no. 2 can of
deviled crabs; strain off all the liquor; season with a scant teaspoon
of mustard, scant teaspoon cayenne pepper, half teaspoon salt, good
half teaspoon of liquor from crosse & blackwell's chow-chow, one
teaspoon worcestershire sauce, tablespoonful vinegar and a half
teaspoon lemon juice; parsley to taste. mix _thoroughly_, and
stir into butter and milk. when cooking well, stir into it rapidly two
eggs that have been well beaten. remove from stove and put in crab
shells with butter the size of filbert and rolled crackers on top.
heat in quick oven and serve at once, garnished with parsley.

this recipe makes an amount sufficient for eight persons. if desired,
cracker crumbs very fine may be added to increase the quantity, just
before stirring in the eggs. the crabs may be kept three or four days
if in a cool place.


deviled crabs.

from mrs. anna e. m. farnum, of idaho, lady manager.

boil them, take the meat out of the bodies, and large claws; put it
into stew pan with half a pint of claret, spoonful of eschalot
vinegar, a little cayenne, some salt, piece of butter. stew for an
hour over a gentle fire until they are almost dry. then add small
quantity of fish stock, or gravy, a tablespoonful of essence of
anchovy, and small piece of butter rolled in flour. serve with sippets
of fried bread around the dish.


deviled crabs.

from miss jennie torreyson, of nevada, alternate lady manager.

have one large crab picked from the shell, and shred fine, and the
shell well cleansed. heat one egg well, add one _tea_-cup sweet
cream; butter, size of an egg, melted; one sherry glass of sherry; one
large spoonful of worcestershire sauce; mace, allspice and cloves to
taste; a good deal of cayenne and a little black pepper and salt. stir
this all together over the fire till it boils; then pour over the crab
and mix well; fill the shell and sprinkle over the top a thick layer
of fine cracker crumbs and bits of butter. put in a hot oven till
browned on top. serve hot.


soft shell crabs.

from mrs. george w. lamar, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

plunge the crabs into boiling water and leave for about ten minutes.
wash them carefully and remove the sand bags. dry them thoroughly and
for one dozen crabs have six raw eggs, well beaten. dip each crab into
the eggs and roll them in cracker dust seasoned with salt and black
pepper. fry a light brown, in boiling butter or lard.


frog legs.

from mrs. ella ray miller, of idaho, alternate lady manager.

frog legs must be first salted and then dipped in a batter made of
cracker dust and beaten eggs. fry them in sweet table butter until
they are a golden brown color. the batter retains their sweet juices
and they need no other condiments.


panne oysters.

from mrs. alice b. castleman, of kentucky, alternate lady manager.

drain two dozen or more oysters in a colander. pour over them draining
from them, one quart of ice water. put an iron skillet or frying pan
on the fire; let it get almost red hot. then put in the oysters,
shaking and stirring them until they boil; add a little salt and
pepper, one large tablespoonful butter. the dish must be hot and the
oysters must be served _very_ hot; must not stand a minute. soda
crackers put in the stove to get hot and brown, and the oysters poured
over them, are very nice.


creamed oysters.

from mrs. mira b. f. ladd, of new hampshire, lady manager.

parboil one pint of oysters in their own liquor until they are plump.
drain thoroughly and have your cracker crumbs and  white sauce ready.
put a layer of oysters on a platter, then the white sauce over them,
and a layer of the crumbs on top. bake about twenty minutes or until
they are brown. for this quantity of oysters use a cup of cracker or
bread crumbs and about one-third of a cup of butter, melted and
stirred into the crumbs. to make the white sauce, take two
tablespoonfuls of butter, one pint of milk, two heaping tablespoonfuls
of flour, one-half teaspoonful of salt and one-half saltspoonful of
pepper. heat the milk. put the butter in a granite saucepan and when
it bubbles stir in the dry flour very quickly until well mixed. pour
on one-third of the milk, let it boil up and thicken, then add slowly
the rest of the milk. it should be free from lumps before you put in
the last of the milk. let it boil a little, then add the pepper and
salt; also a tablespoonful of lemon juice and a little celery salt.


"little pigs in blankets."

from mrs. isabella laning candee, of illinois, alternate lady manager.

this amusing and appetizing dish is easily made. take large fine
oysters and drain them well, and season with salt and pepper, and a
drop of lemon juice if desired. cut fat bacon into very thin, even
slices, and wrap each oyster in a slice of bacon, fastening securely
with a wooden skewer--a toothpick will do. two cloves can be inserted
at one end of the roll to simulate _ears_. have the frying pan
very hot, and cook the little pigs until the bacon crisps. serve
immediately upon small pieces of toast.


escalloped oysters.

from miss meta telfair mclaws, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

spread cracker crumbs on bottom of baking dish; then place bits of
butter and a layer of oysters, which must be sprinkled with salt and
pepper. make alternate layers of oysters, cracker crumbs, salt,
pepper, and butter until dish is full. have crumbs on top. now make a
small incision in center and pour in one well beaten egg, with a small
quantity of oyster liquor. put in hot oven and brown nicely.


creamed shrimps.

from mrs. m. d. foley, of nevada, lady manager.

cover one can of shrimps with cold milk and allow to come to a boil;
then drain. rub one tablespoonful flour with same quantity of butter
and add slowly one cup rich milk or cream at the boiling point. season
with salt, pepper, and nutmeg, and enough tomato juice to color a
shrimp pink. stir in the shrimps and when hot pour over small squares
of toast arranged on a warm platter. garnish with sliced lemons.




sauces


sauce mousseline.

from mrs. wilson patterson, of maryland, alternate lady manager.

_i am always interested, and do my best to help anything done to
help other women.

i send you a recipe which i hope may be of service to you. it is a
delicious sauce for asparagus and is given me by the chef of prince
jerome bonaparte.

wishing you every success in your most worthy undertaking, i am,

sincerely yours, _

put in a sauce pan a piece of butter, melt it, add it pinch of flour;
work it together thoroughly, wet it with a little warm water, salt it,
make it boil, add the yolk of an egg; then beat up the sauce with a
little fresh butter; pass it through the finest gauze. at the minute
of serving add two spoonfuls of beaten cream, well mixed.

boiled egg sauce.

from mrs. james r. doolitte, jr. of chicago, lady manager.

one large tablespoonful butter; two small tablespoonfuls flour; two
eggs. put the butter in a tin pan over boiling water; when melted,
stir in flour. when thoroughly and smoothly mixed, add enough milk to
make it the proper consistency for sauce. boil the eggs hard, cut them
in small pieces, stir them into the sauce, and serve with fish or
boiled mutton.


tartar sauce.

from mrs. myra bradwell, of chicago, lady manager.

three eggs; four tablespoonfuls olive oil; one and one-half
teaspoonful of mustard; one teaspoonful black pepper; one teaspoonful
salt; juice of one lemon; two tablespoonfuls of vinegar; one
tablespoonful chopped parsley. boil two of the eggs very hard; rub the
yolks to a powder; add the raw yolk of the other egg. stir in slowly
the oil. chop fine the two whites of the boiled eggs; add the chopped
parsley and one small onion chopped as fine as possible.




meats


filet of beef.

from mrs. governor oglesby, of illinois, lady manager.

filets of beef may be supplied by the butcher already trimmed and
larded, but a more economical way is to buy the large piece which
contains the tenderloin. have the butcher cut the tenderloin out and
the rest of the meat into slices one-half or one inch thick; these
pieces may be used to advantage in beef olives, stews or pies, the
bones in the piece of meat to be broken up for the soup pot. the filet
is then to be prepared by the cook in this manner: remove all skin and
fat; fold the thin end under and skewer in place; the upper side must
present a smooth surface for larding; with a larding needle lard the
filet of beef in regular and even rows, with strips of firm, fat
pickled pork one-quarter of an inch square and about two and one-
quarter inches long. the lardoon should be about one-third of an inch
under the surface and come out about three-quarters of an inch from
where it went in, one-half inch projecting on each side. place the
filet in a small baking pan, with minced salt pork and suet on the
bottom of the pan, and six spoonfuls of stock to baste the filet.
one-half to three-quarters of an hour will roast it, depending on
heat of oven and whether it is preferred underdone or well done.
serve with mushroom sauce or  la jardinire.

_mushroom sauce_--melt one tablespoon butter; stir in a
tablespoon of flour, and when it is well browned, add, after heating,
six tablespoons of stock with half the juice from the can of mushrooms
and one-half teaspoonful of lemon juice, seasoned with pepper and
salt; add the button mushrooms and let all simmer about ten minutes.
pour over the filet of beef and serve.

_ la jardinire_--potatoes, turnips, beets, and carrots, cut in
round balls, tiny onions, cauliflower blossoms, french beans or peas,
are boiled separately in salted water, seasoned with salt, butter and
cream, drained and then piled in little groups around the filet of
beef, each pile being one kind of vegetable.

_beef olives_--slices of beef one-half inch thick and about four
inches square, spread with a force meat of cold meat, bacon or ham,
with one cup of bread crumbs, the yolks of three eggs, one pint of
gravy or stock, a tablespoon of catsup, salt and pepper to taste. roll
up the slices of beef and fasten with tiny skewers; brush them over
with egg and crumb and brown slightly in the oven; then put in stew
pan and stew till tender. serve in gravy in which they were cooked,
with fried or toasted croutons of bread.


roast beef.

from mrs. matilda b. carse, of chicago, lady manager,

in roasting meats of all kinds, the method adopted should be the one
that in the most perfect manner preserves the juices inside  the meat.
to roast beef in the best possible manner, place  the clean-cut side
of the meat upon a _very_ hot pan.  press it close to the pan
until seared and browned. reverse  and sear and brown the other side.
then put at once in the oven, the heat of which should be firm and
steady, but not too intense, and allow 20 minutes to the pound: if it
is to be rare, less half an hour deducted from the aggregate time on
account of searing. for example, a five-lb. roast of beef will require
one and one-quarter hours, a six-lb. roast one and one-half hours, and
so on. if the oven is in not too hot, the beef requires no basting.
when it is at the proper temperature and the cooking is going all
right, the meat will keep up a gentle sputtering in the pan. a roast
of beef should never be washed but carefully wiped off with a damp
cloth. when meal is done, take it from the oven, cut off the outside
slices, then salt and pepper well. the meat, if roasted in this way,
will be sweet, juicy and tender.


yorkshire pudding.

from mrs. harriet a. lucas of pennsylvania, lady manager.

this pudding, as its name indicates is a great english dish, and to be
used as vegetables are, with _roast beef only_. when vegetables
are scarce, it adds a change to the mnu, which everybody likes but
few know how to make successfully, because _it is very simple_.

for a small family, put one pint of milk into a bowl, a small pinch of
salt: break into this (without beating) two fresh eggs. now have a
good egg beater in your hand; dust into this one-half pint of sifted
flour; beat vigorously and rub out all the lumps of flour. have ready
a smaller roasting pan than that in which your beef is roasting, and
put in it a good tablespoonful of sweet lard, _very hot_; pour
your light batter into this, place a spit or wire frame in the
pudding, lift the roast from the pan about 20 minutes before it is
done and put it on the spit, so that the juices of the beef will drop
on to the pudding. about 20 minutes will cook it. make gravy in the
pan from which the roast has been removed. slide into a hot meat dish
and serve with the meat. most cooks persistently raise it by adding
some sort of baking powder, thinking it of no importance that the meat
is over the pudding.

i never yet found a person that did not enjoy a _good_ yorkshire
pudding. this is a small one, for four or five persons. if you
increase the pudding, also select a larger pan, as the batter should
be fully one-half to an inch in the pan; if not, it will become too
crusty.


roulards.

from mrs. ralph trautmann, of new york city, first vice president
board of lady managers.

secure slices of beef cut very thin from the round or cross rib. take
tomatoes, carrots, onions, celery, parsley, and hard boiled eggs, all
chopped very fine. mix with a good sized piece of butter, cracker
crumbs, a pinch of ginger and salt and pepper to taste. mix well and
spread on the slices of beef. make a roll of each slice, folding in
the edges to retain the dressing, and tie up securely with cord. have
beef suet on the fire; after rendering and straining, add a little
water to prevent scorching and bring to a boil in a flat-bottomed pot
or kettle. drop in the roulards, rolled and tied; stir with a spoon
until well browned; then set back on the stove and let simmer gently
for two hours with pot tightly covered. drain well on napkin or sieve,
and garnish with hard boiled eggs, parsley and slices of lemon. serve
hot. each roulard should be about the size of an egg.


beef loaf.

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

three pounds lean finely chopped beef; one dozen rolled butter
crackers; four beaten eggs; one tablespoonful black pepper; one
tablespoonful salt; butter the size of an egg. mix thoroughly, mold
into two bricks and bake like a roast. this makes a very nice dish
sliced cold for ten. a very little sage can be added if desired.


hash.

from mrs. annie l. y. orff, of missouri, alternate lady manager.

chop any kind of meat fine; to one cupful add one cup of chopped
boiled potatoes, three-fourths cup bread crumbs, put one-half cup
milk, one tablespoon butter, a little pepper and salt in a sauce pan
on the stove; when boiling stir in the hash which should be well mixed
together; take from the fire and add one well-beaten egg; heat gem
pans, and grease; put a spoonful of the hash in each, and put in the
oven till nicely browned.


mutton chops.

from miss mary b. hancock, of iowa, treasurer of state board and
alternate lady manager.

sprinkle the chops with salt, pepper and flour; put them in the double
broiler; broil over or before the fire for eight minutes. serve on a
_hot_ dish with butter, salt, and pepper, or tomato  sauce. the
fire for chops should not be as hot as for steak.  chops can be
seasoned with salt and pepper, wrapped in buttered  paper, and broiled
ten minutes over a hot fire.


roast lamb.

from mrs. robt. b. mitchell, of kansas, lady manager.

brush three ounces of melted butter over the inner part of a well
trimmed quarter of lamb, and strew thick with finely grated bread
crumbs, seasoned with salt, pepper and parsley; roll and skewer four
or five slices of bacon to the outer side; put in rather quick oven.
when thoroughly done (not over cooked) remove the bacon and baste the
meat with well beaten yolk of egg and gravy; cover thick with bread
crumbs and brown nicely. garnish the platter on which it is served
with sprays of mint. mint sauce should be an accompaniment. this makes
not only an attractive looking, but delicious roast of lamb.


lamb chops.

from mrs. hester a. hanback, of kansas, lady manager.

trim neatly and hack with sharp knife until tender; dip each piece in
beaten egg and roll in cracker crumbs; place in pan equal quantities
of butter and lard very hot; fry until nicely browned and serve with
green peas.


potted tongue.

from mrs. frank h. daniell, of new hampshire, alternate lady manager.

take the remains of a cold boiled tongue, remove all the hard parts,
cut the meat into small pieces and afterwards pound it to a smooth
paste. season with cayenne, and beat with it one-fourth of its weight
in clarified butter. press it into small jars, cover it one-fourth
inch deep with clarified butter, melted drippings or melted suet. a
smaller proportion of butter will be required if a little of the fat
of the tongue is used instead of the lean only, but the butter must
not be entirely dispensed with. it can be seasoned by the addition of
one teaspoonful of mixed mustard, one saltspoonful of white pepper, a
pinch of cayenne, and as much grated nutmeg as will cover a three-cent
piece to each pound of tongue. potted tongue is excellent when pounded
with its weight in well dressed cold chicken, cold veal, or partridge.
the tongue must be pounded to a perfectly smooth paste.


veal croquettes.

from mrs. isabella beecher hooker, of connecticut, lady manager.

mince cold roast or boiled veal; add one-fourth as much of minced
oysters scalded in their own liquor. season with a dusting of red
pepper, salt, a flavor of onion (two fine cut rounds of onion is
sufficient), a tablespoonful of lemon juice. stir this into a half
pint of drawn butter made thick with flour; mould the croquettes; roll
them in egg, then in cracker crumbs, salted and peppered; put them
where they will be cold; when chilled put them in a frying basket into
hot fat; two minutes will brown them.


veal croquettes.

from miss katharine l. mikor, of louisiana, fourth vice president
board of lady managers.

two pounds of veal, boiled until done; remove skin and hone and chop
very fine; crumb a half loaf of bread and mix with the veal broth; add
three eggs, two tablespoons of butter, salt, pepper, parsley, etc.
then form into egg-shaped balls and fry brown in boiling lard. it is
necessary to dust the balls with cracker-dust or flour.


veal pot pie

from miss susan w. ball, of indiana, alternate lady manager.

take two pounds of veal--a rib piece is good; cut it in small pieces;
put it into a pot, having placed a small plate in the bottom to keep
the meat from burning. put in two quarts of water, either hot or cold.
keep it boiling for about an hour and a half. then make a quart of
flour into biscuit dough; drop in small lumps; cover closely. twenty
or twenty--five minutes will generally cook them. be sure that there
is water sufficient to cover the meat entirely when the dumplings are
put in.


casselettes de veau.

from mrs. james r. deane, of california, lady manager.

this is a very simple, attractive and palatable dish for a luncheon
table and may be used either warm or cold. yours, cordially,
ingredients for one dozen: one-quarter pound macaroni; one pound filet
of veal; one ounce butter; one ounce flour; one gill of white stock or
milk; three eggs; pepper; salt, and a little cayenne to taste. chop
the veal and then pass it twice through a sausage cutter or mincing
machine. cook the butter and flour together for about ten minutes;
then add the milk or stock; then turn on a plate to cool; then add the
minced veal; then add the seasoning; break the eggs in one by one;
stir well. boil the macaroni in salt and water until soft; drain it
well and cut into rings about one-quarter inch long; have some small
cups shaped like egg-cups; grease the sides slightly and place in the
bottom of each cup a circular piece of cold boiled ham, fitting
closely. then arrange the macaroni on the sides, the open part to the
side of the cup; then fill each cup with the chopped veal; cover with
a greased paper and steam for twenty minutes. if eaten warm, use any
gravy that may be used with veal. will keep for two or three days.


veal fricassee.

from mrs. t. j. butler, of arizona, lady manager.

take a knuckle of veal; boil two hours in sufficient water to cover
it; when thoroughly cooked, remove the meat and thicken  the gravy
with one tablespoonful of flour; add a little salt  and one egg, well
beaten; pour over the meat and serve hot  with slices of lemon.


veal loaf

from mrs. whiting s. clark, of iowa, lady manager.

three pounds raw veal, chopped fine; two-thirds cup butter or its
equivalent of salt pork, chopped; three eggs, well beaten with
tablespoon milk; four boston crackers, pounded fine; two even
teaspoons pepper; one teaspoon sage; one tablespoon salt. mix well in
a loaf and bake two-hours. baste often with butter and water.




sweetbreads


sweet-bread croquettes.

from mrs. schuyler colfax, of indiana, alternate lady manager-at-
large.

_it gives me great pleasure to send you the recipes you request, and
thus further, in this small way, your unique and most generous
project. the recipe for sweetbread croquettes is from mrs. henderson's
practical cooking and dinner giving, but as it is the best one that i
have ever tried, i send it. cordially yours,_

two pair of sweetbreads blanched and cut into dice. half a box of
mushrooms also cut into dice. make a sauce by putting into a sauce pan
one and a half ounces of butter, and when it bubbles, sprinkle in two
ounces of flour, mix the butter and flour well together and cook
thoroughly; then put in a gill of strong stock; stock for this is best
made of chicken with some pieces of beef and veal added, or a gill of
cream may be used instead of the stock. when the flour, butter and
stock are well mixed, put in the sweetbreads and mushrooms and stir
over the fire until they are thoroughly heated. now take them off the
fire, add the beaten yolks of two eggs, return to the fire long enough
to set the eggs but do not allow them to boil. when cool, form into
croquettes, roll first in cracker or bread crumbs, then in egg, and
again in crumbs and fry in boiling lard.


sweetbreads and oysters.

from seora teresa armijo de symington, of new mexico.

soak and blanch your sweetbreads, cut them into equal sizes and remove
the skins and little pipes. take about three dozen fine oysters,
strain off the liquor. put the sweetbreads into a stew pan and cover
them with the oyster liquor; add also, if you have it, three large
spoonfuls of gravy of roast veal and a quarter of a pound of fresh
butter cut into bits and each bit rolled in flour. when the
sweetbreads are done put in the oysters and let them cook for about
five minutes and take them out again; add at the last two wineglasses
of sweet cream; stir up well for a few minutes and serve in a hot
dish.


sweetbreads and mushrooms,

from mrs. p. b. winston, of minnesota, alternate lady manager.

take all the fat off sweetbreads; throw into boiling water; add one
teaspoonful of salt and let stand on fire for twenty minutes; take
from fire, remove all skin and pick to pieces. put a tablespoonful of
butter in a pan and let melt, add tablespoonful flour and one-half
pint of cream; stir until it boils, add sweetbreads and five mushrooms
chopped fine, one-half teaspoonful of salt and a little pepper. serve
in patties or paper cases.


sweetbreads en coquille.

from miss jennie torreyson, of nevada, alternate lady manager.

one pound sweetbreads. soak them one hour in salt water; boil till
tender in salt water in which an onion has been put. one can mushrooms
("champignons") cut into small pieces, stew a bit till tender and mix
with sweetbreads after they are boiled till tender and cut into small
pieces. one pint cream, one tablespoonful butter, one tablespoonful
flour. cream the butter, mixing with the flour till smooth; stir with
the cream, add one tablespoonful of worcestershire sauce and stir
together over the fire until it boils, then pour it over the
sweetbreads and mushrooms. serve in shells or cases. can be used also
without mushrooms if desired.


sweetbread patties.

from miss wilhelmine reitz, of indiana, lady manager.

wash one pair of sweetbreads; throw them into boiling water and simmer
gently twenty minutes; then throw them into cold water to blanch and
cool. when cool pick them into small pieces, rejecting all the fine
membrane. chop fine a half can of mushrooms. put a large tablespoonful
of butter in a sauce pan to melt without browning; add an even
tablespoonful of flour, mix until smooth; add a half pint of cream,
stir continually until it boils; add a half teaspoonful of salt, a
dash of white pepper; the mushrooms and sweetbreads mix and stand over
boiling water for five minutes. serve in paper cases, silver shells or
in puff-paste cases.




poultry


boiled chicken.

from mrs. governor edwin c. burleigh, of maine, second vice president
board of lady managers.

joint the chicken; cut in small pieces; remove the skin; put into
tepid water. have ready a frying pan with hot melted butter; put the
chicken into the pan and fry to a delicate brown; then put into a
kettle, cover with water and boil very slowly for an hour. season.
remove chicken and thicken gravy with flour.


jambolaya. (a spanish creole dish)

from miss katharine l. minor, of louisiana, fourth vice president
board of lady managers.

cut up the remains of a chicken or turkey, cover with water, and stew
until the substance is extracted; then shred the meat. wash one pound
of rice carefully and set aside. put one tablespoon of lard into a
porcelain-lined saucepan; add a small spoon of finely chopped onion
and a tomato; then put in the shredded fowl and liquid in which it was
boiled, adding the rice, red pepper and salt; sufficient water must be
added to cover the rice, which must cook and steam until soft, but not
wet or like mush.


chicken livers, en brochette, with bacon.

from mrs. col. james a. mulligan, of chicago, lady manager.

take eighteen fresh chicken livers; dry well; season with pepper and
salt; cut each liver in two pieces. prepare six slices of lean bacon,
broil one minute; cut each slice into six pieces. take six silver
skewers; run the skewer through the centre of the piece of chicken
liver, then through a slice of bacon, until each skewer is filled with
alternate slices of chicken liver and bacon. roll each one in olive
oil, then in bread crumbs, and broil five minutes on each side over
moderate fire. arrange on hot dish, pour matre d'hotel butter over
them. garnish with watercress and serve.


pollo con arroz.

from seora don manuel chaves, of new mexico.

primeramente se pone a herbir el pollo hasta que este bien cosido y
despues so frie una poca de cobolla en manteca junto con el arroz y se
le hecha pimienta entera y se le anade el caldo, colado, en que se
cosio el pollo. despues se anade el pollo cortado en pedazos pequeos
y se le hecha sal.


pollo con tomates.

lomismo que con arroz, con la excepcion que en lugar de arroz se le
echan tomates.


tamales de chile.

lomismo, con la excepcion que en lugar de echarles azucar, canela y
pasas se les echa en el medio carne con chile y sal.


coquilles de volaille.

from miss josephine shakspeare, of louisiana, lady manager.

boil the chicken until very tender; pull the meat from the bones in
flakes; remove all the skin and cut the meat into very small pieces.
take one-half pint of the chicken broth, one teaspoonful of minced
onion, the same of minced parsley, two tablespoons of butter rubbed
into same quantity of flour, let this cook for a few moments and add
one-half pint of cream or rich milk. season the meat with a little
cayenne pepper and some salt; add to this a small box of truffles, cut
fine, also a box of mushrooms thinly sliced; stir all this into the
sauce. if there should not be enough to cover the meat, add more
broth, cream, butter and pepper, little by little, until you have
enough sauce and of the right consistency. it should be as thick as
rich cream. when cold add a claret glass of sherry wine. before taking
from the fire, add to it two more tablespoons of butter, a little at a
time, never add all at once, it may oil it. fill the shells, sprinkle
bread crumbs on top and about twenty minutes before ready to serve
them, place in a very hot oven to brown. must not _stand after
cooked_.


croquettes.

from mrs. l. c. gillespie, of tennessee, lady manager.

breast of a large turkey; five sweetbreads; one and one-half pint of
milk; one-half pound butter; five tablespoonfuls of flour; two eggs.
chop the turkey and sweetbreads very fine, using a silver knife for
chopping the sweetbreads. beat the whites and yolks of the eggs
separately as you would for a cake. mix the eggs, butter, flour and
milk in a porcelain vessel and cook until the mixture comes to the
consistency of cream sauce; and that it may cook smoothly, it will be
necessary to make first a thick paste of the flour by stirring into it
a very small quantity of the milk, gradually thinning it with more of
the milk. while cooking it must be stirred constantly, and as soon as
it is sufficiently thick add to the mixture the chopped turkey and
sweetbreads and cook the whole for two minutes longer. use no
seasoning but pepper (white or cayenne) and salt to the taste. this
quantity will make twenty-two large croquettes, which are prettiest
moulded in a pear-shaped wine glass. with a little practice you can
mould them in your hand. have ready some cracker crumbs rolled very
fine and dust like. fry the croquettes in boiling lard and enough to
cover them. when a rich brown take them out and place on sieve or
brown paper to rid them of the surplus grease. run them into a well
heated oven for a few minutes before serving. put a teaspoonful of
cream sauce on the top of each croquette.


chicken croquettes.

from mrs. sarah h. bixby, of maine, alternate lady manager.

chop one-half pound chicken quite fine; add one teaspoonful salt; one
saltspoonful pepper; one saltspoonful celery salt; one teaspoon lemon
juice; one tablespoon chopped parsley and a few drops of onion juice;
moisten with the thick cream sauce.

_thick cream sauce_--melt two tablespoons butter; add two heaping
tablespoons cornstarch; one teaspoon salt and one saltspoon pepper;
add slowly one pint hot cream and beat well.


curry of chicken in puffs.

from seora teresa armijo de symington, of new mexico.

first prepare your puffs by the following recipe. ingredients: two
cupfuls of milk, two of flour, two eggs and a piece of butter the size
of an egg melted; a little salt; heat the eggs separately and well;
add the milk to the yolks, then the flour and so on, the whites last;
beat all well together. they may be baked in teacups. this quantity
will make about a dozen puffs.


_curry of chicken_--buy a young chicken, cut it into pieces,
leaving out all the bones; season with pepper and salt to taste; fry
them in butter until well done; cut an onion fine, which fry in the
same butter until brown; add a teacupful of clear stock, a teaspoonful
of sugar. take about a tablespoonful of curry powder and a little
flour, mix and rub together with a little of the stock until quite
smooth; add to the sauce pan; put in the chicken and let it boil for a
few minutes; just before taking out add the juice of half a lemon.
when this is all ready proceed to fill puffs while hot and serve
immediately. garnish puffs with parsley and serve a dish of cold slaw
with it.


pilauf.

from miss floride cuningham, of south carolina, lady manager.

select a good fat hen, one pound of bacon strip, and one dozen whole
black peppers, and boil together until quite done. take them out of
the pot, and put into the liquid left a pint and a half of rice,
seasoned with a dessertspoonful of salt, boil twenty minutes, drain
from it any of the juice that may remain, and place the pot again on
the range, where the rice cannot burn, but where it will have the
opportunity to dry thoroughly--each grain remaining apart. keep the
chicken hot and brown the bacon in the oven. when the rice is ready
serve in an open dish, place the chicken on the top and pour over it a
rich sauce of melted butter and hard boiled eggs chopped fine. the
bacon can be sliced very thin and served with lettuce as a course.


fricassee chicken.

from mrs. helen c. brayton, of south carolina, vice-president of state
board and lady manager.

cut the chicken in pieces and stew in as much water as will cover it.
add a bunch of sweet herbs, white pepper and onions. when cooked, add
the yolks of six eggs, glass of white wine, chopped parsley, butter,
and tablespoonful of cream, all beaten together.


a good roast turkey.

from mrs. helen a. peck, of missouri, alternate lady manager-at-
large.

an ordinary turkey weighing eight to ten pounds requires at least two
hours for proper and thorough cooking. prepare your fowl and rub dry
with a clean towel; then mix a little pepper and salt and rub both
inside and outside of the turkey before putting in the dressing. grate
stale bread, about three cups; then add a small teaspoon of pepper and
the same amount of powdered sage or sweet marjoram, salt and a little
salt fat pork chopped very fine or a piece of butter the size of an
egg; use warm water to mix the whole to the consistency of thick
batter; beat an egg and stir into it the last thing; stuff the breast
with half of the dressing, then sew up with coarse white thread and
put the remaining dressing into the body and sew up. take skewers of
wood or iron and pin the wings closely to the sides, then turn the
neck back and pin that firmly. one can use twine and tie them if they
haven't the skewers. force the legs down and tie tightly to the body
before placing the turkey in the dripping pan with nearly a pint of
water. have a brisk fire and baste the turkey at least every fifteen
minutes with these drippings. this frequent basting is of great
importance as it keeps in the juices and allows thorough cooking. turn
the turkey two or three times during the cooking. during the last half
hour dredge with flour and butter freely. the crisp pasty look so
desirable and appetizing comes from this. cook gizzard and liver in a
sauce pan on the stove until thoroughly tender, then chop very fine
and put them in the gravy to boil thoroughly in the dripping pan in
the gravy which is delicious, and to be served from a tureen.


dressing for turkey.

from mrs. w. h. felton, of georgia, lady manager.

bread crumbs and cold rice, equal quantities; season with pepper,
onion and salt to taste, mixing well with cup of butter and yolks of
three hard boiled eggs; dress the outside with circles of white hard
boiled eggs and sprigs of parsley or celery.


how to cook chestnuts.

from miss eloise l. roman, of maryland, alternate lady manager.

two quarts of water to one quart of fresh chestnuts. if dried they
should be soaked several hours in cold water. boil from three-
quarters to one hour. abut five minutes before they are done add a
handful of salt. peel and skin, serve hot, browned in butter, or cold
with salad dressing and equal parts of chopped celery. when parboiled
and skinned with salt and a little pepper it makes an excellent
dressing for turkeys.




game


wild duck in maryland.

from mrs. william reid, of maryland, lady manager.

wild ducks, canvassback, redheads, etc., are roasted without stuffing.
after they are picked and thoroughly cleansed, roast them in a tin
kitchen before a hot fire or in a quick oven for twenty-one minutes.
they should be well browned on the outside, but the blood should run
when cut with a knife. unless underdone the flavor of the duck is
destroyed. fried hominy is generally served with wild duck; and fresh
celery. currant jelly is sometimes used.


snipe and woodcock broiled on toast.

from mrs. rufus s. frost, of massachusetts, lady manager.

prepare the birds with great care; place in baking tin and put in
oven. pour into the tin enough water, boiling hot, to cover the bottom
of the tin or bake pan; cover the bake pan with another tin; keep them
closely covered and let them cook very steadily until tender, adding
from time to time enough boiling hot water to keep birds from burning,
or even _sticking_ to the tin. when very tender remove from the
oven and from the bake pan, carefully saving all the liquid in the
pan, which you set on top of the stove, which is the foundation and
the _flavor_ for your sauce  or gravy which you make _in
this_ pan for your birds after they are broiled. have in an earthen
dish some melted butter; dip the birds in the butter and then in
indian or corn meal and put on the gridiron to brown and finish
cooking; keep them hot as possible until you serve. arrange nicely
trimmed pieces of toasted bread on the heated platter, put on each
piece a bird, pour over and around the birds on the platter a sauce
which you make _in_ the bake pan in which your birds were semi-
cooked, and which you have kept on top of the range while your birds
were broiling. pour into this pan of _liquid_ or "juice"  one
teacup sweet cream, and thicken with one tablespoon butter, yolk of
one egg and two tablespoons of indian meal; let it boil up once just
to thicken, and pour boiling hot onto the birds and toast on platter,
saving some to send in separate serving dish. if you prefer flour to
the corn meal to dip the birds in after the melted butter bath, use
flour also to thicken the sauce or gravy, which should be a brown
sauce or gravy and is generally brown enough if made in roasting pan.
a prize cook in washington once confided to me that "a leetle last
year's spiced pickle syrup am luscious flavor for gravy of the wee
birds, robins, quail, snipe and them like." alas! in the same moment
of flattering triumph for _me_, she added--triumphantly on
_her_ part also--"lor, chile, i'se de only one libing dis day
dat knows nuff to use that same, sure!"


prairie chicken.

from mrs. e. s. thomson, of maryland, lady manager.

do not wash prairie chickens. cover this breasts with very thin slices
of bacon, or rub them well with butter; roast them before a good fire,
basting them often with butter. cook twenty minutes, salt and pepper
them, and serve on a hot dish as soon as cooked.

_sauce for the above_--first roll a pint of dry bread crumbs and
pass half of them through a sieve. put a small onion into a pint of
milk and when it boils remove the onion and thicken the milk with the
half pint of sifted crumbs; take from the fire and stir in a heaping
teaspoonful of butter, a grating of nutmeg, pepper and salt. put a
little butter in a saute pan, and when hot throw in the half pint of
coarser crumbs which remained in the sieve; stir them over the fire
until they assume a light brown color, taking care that they do not
burn, and stir into them a pinch of cayenne pepper. for serving, pour
over the chicken, when helped, a spoonful of the white sauce and on
this place a spoonful of the crumbs.




vegetables


vegetable oyster.

from mrs. governor bagley, of michigan, lady manager-at-large.

_i regret that the long distance i am from home prevents me from
sending you many valuable recipes i would be glad to contribute to
your book. one, however, occurs to me that you may consider worthy a
place, and, i assure you, makes a very delicious dish.

sincerely yours,_

while cooking vegetable oyster put in the kettle a small piece of
codfish. this adds very much to its flavor and delicacy and makes a
delicious dish out of what would otherwise be an almost tasteless
vegetable. the codfish should, of course, be removed before sending to
the table.


cauliflower with tartar sauce.

from mrs. myra bradwell, of chicago, lady manager.

serve the cauliflower with one cup of drawn butter in which has been
stirred the juice of a lemon, and a half teaspoonful of french
mustard, mixed up well with the sauce.


scalloped potatoes.

from mrs. beriah wilkins, of district of columbia, fifth vice-
president, board of lady managers.

slice six raw potatoes as thin as wafers. this can be done with a
sharp knife, although there is a little instrument for the purpose, to
be had at the house furnishing stores, which flutes prettily as well
as slices evenly. lay in ice water a few minutes; then put a layer in
the bottom of a pudding dish, and over this sprinkle salt and pepper
and small bits of butter; then another layer of potatoes and so on
until the dish is full. pour over this a pint of milk, stick bits of
butter thickly over it, cover the dish, set it in the oven, bake half
an hour. remove the cover if not sufficiently brown.


escalloped sweet potatoes.

from mrs. p. b. winston, of minnesota, alternate lady manager.

take large sweet potatoes; parboil them slightly and cut them in
transverse slices. prepare a deep baking dish and cover the bottom
with a layer of slices; add a little butter, a very little sugar and
nutmeg. strew over this a few bits of orange peel and add a little
juice of the orange. fill the dish in like manner, finishing with fine
shred of orange peel. bake until tender and you will have a dish to
satisfy an epicure.


potato puff. (a la geneve)

from mrs. h. f. brown, of minnesota, lady manager.

whip mashed potatoes light and soft, with milk, butter and two raw
eggs; season with pepper and salt, and beat in a few spoonfuls of
powdered cheese. pile upon a bake-dish and brown nicely. serve in
dish.


potato croquettes.

from mrs. frances p. burrows, of michigan, alternate lady manager.

four large mealy potatoes, cold. mash them; add two tablespoons of
fresh, melted butter, pinch of salt, a little pepper, one tablespoon
of cream. whip it for about five minutes or until very smooth and
light. make into forms, roll them in a beaten egg and bread crumbs.
fry in boiling lard.


potatoes--mashed.

from mrs. e. j. p. howes, of michigan, lady manager.

peel potatoes thin; put into boiling water with a little salt added.
cook until tender; drain off the water and remove the cover a few
moments to dry the potatoes; turn into an earthen dish that has been
heated, and beat up with a wire heater or silver fork, moistening the
whole with cream; or, if not available, milk with a little butter will
answer; salt to taste and mold in any desired form when it is ready to
serve. a wooden masher in apt to make it heavy, while beating will
make it light and creamy.


boston baked beans.

from mrs. elizabeth c. langworthy, of nebraska, lady manager.

soak one quart of small, dry beans over night. parboil in the morning
and place in earthen jar, with salt and pepper to taste. add one-half
teaspoon soda and two tablespoons of molasses; also a small piece of
salt pork. cover with water and bake eight hours, adding boiling water
as needed.


lima beans

from mrs. marian d. cooper, of montana, alternate lady manager.

soak beans over night; cook one hour in water, leaving very little
water when done. just before serving season with pepper, salt, cream
and butter and heat thoroughly.


baked tomatoes.

from mrs. governor rickards, of montana, president state board and
lady manager.

select large-sized, smooth and round tomatoes. cut from the stem end a
slice and lay aside. scoop all the inside of tomato out, being careful
not to break through; add half as much cracker or bread crumbs; season
highly with salt and pepper; add plenty of butter, a dash or two of
cayenne; put on the stove and cook for ten minutes. now fill the
hollow tomatoes with this dressing; when full, add four or six whole
cloves, putting them on top of the dressing; either pile up high or
make level and put on the sliced top. place tomatoes in a large baking
pan, with a little hot water to prevent sticking. bake fifteen
minutes.


baked tomatoes.

from mrs. augusta truman, of california, lady alternate-at-large.

select smooth, medium-sized tomatoes; make a small aperture at the
stalk end; remove the pulp and seeds with a spoon and put into a sieve
to drain. chop equal parts of cold chicken and veal and one green
pepper; add a well-beaten egg, half cup grilled bread crumbs, piece of
butter, pepper, salt, sage and a suspicion of onion; mix well
together; moisten with some of the juice; fill the tomatoes; bake half
an hour in a moderate oven. serve each tomato on a lettuce leaf. this
makes a pretty as well as a savory entre.


stewed tomatoes.

from miss mary h. krout, of indiana, alternate lady manager.

take one quart of firm ripe tomatoes; stew one hour and a half over an
even fire and stir frequently to prevent scorching; then add half a
cup of bread crumbs, one teaspoonful of sugar, salt to taste, a pinch
of cayenne pepper, a heaping tablespoonful of good butter and half a
cup of sweet cream. boil together twenty minutes and serve hot.


beets.

from mrs. governor john m. stone, of mississippi, lady manager.

boil until perfectly done; then pour melted butter, salt and pepper
over and serve hot.


parsnips--stewed.

from mrs. m. r. lee, of mississippi, lady manager.

wash, scrape, and slice about half an inch thick; have a skillet
prepared with half pint hot water and a tablespoon butter; add the
parsnips, season with salt and pepper, cover closely and stew until
the water is cooked away, stirring occasionally to prevent burning.
when done the parsnips will be of a creamy, light brown color.


stuffed green peppers.

from mrs. alice b. castleman, of kentucky, alternate lady manager.

cut off the small end of the pepper; make a slit down the side; remove
all the seeds. mince fine cold chicken, veal or shrimps, and add a
little stale bread soaked in water and well squeezed to dry it; one-
half teaspoonful minced onion; a little minced parsley, pepper, salt
and one tablespoonful butter. put a large tablespoonful of butter in a
spider and heat the dressing for the peppers in it for a few minutes;
then stuff them, tie on the tops and the sides together also. in a
sauce pan put a heaping tablespoonful of butter; when hot add one-half
tablespoonful of flour, which brown in the butter; add a little onion
minced fine and a cup of water; put in the peppers, cover closely and
let them simmer slowly until tender; when done, add one tablespoonful
of butter, pepper and salt to taste.


corn oysters.

from mrs. john s. briggs, of nebraska, lady manager.

one teacup milk, three eggs, one pint green corn grated very fine, a
little salt and as much flour as will make a slightly stiff batter;
beat the eggs, the yolks and whites separately. to the yolks of the
eggs add the milk, corn, salt and flour; beat the whole very hard,
then stir in the whites of the eggs and the oysters; after having
dredged them in a portion of the grated corn, drop this batter, a
spoonful at a time, into hot lard and fry until done.


fried egg plant.

from mrs. lily rosecrans toole, of montana, lady manager.

pare the egg plant and cut in very thin slices; sprinkle each slice
with salt and pepper; pile them evenly; put a tin plate over them and
on this stand a flatiron to press out the juice. let stand one hour.
beat an egg lightly and add to it a tablespoonful of boiling water;
dip each slice first in this and then in bread crumbs. put three
tablespoonfuls of lard into a frying pan; when hot saut the slices, a
few at a time; brown one side then turn and brown the other. as the
fat is consumed add more, waiting each time for it to heat before
putting in the egg plant. drain on brown paper and serve very hot.
tomato catsup should be served with it. (_mrs. rohrer's cook
book._)


macaroni--good.

from mrs. sam s. fifield, of wisconsin, alternate lady manager.

five tablespoons of grated cheese, one of flour, one of butter, one
egg, one-half cup of cream, salt and pepper; put over the fire and
stir until the cheese is dissolved. boil one-fourth package of
macaroni in suited water about fifteen minutes, drain, cover with milk
and boil again. stir all together and bake until brown.


rice as a vegetable.

from mrs. charles h. olmstead, of georgia, lady manager.

wash and pick thoroughly one quart of rice; put in pot containing two
quarts of boiling water; salt to taste; let the rice boil for fifteen
minutes; then pour off all the water that has not been absorbed by the
rice and place the pot on back of stove to steam; stir occasionally
until grains of rice separate.


cranberries.

from mrs. lana a. bates, of nebraska, alternate lady manager.

after removing all soft berries, wash thoroughly; place for about two
minutes in scalding water, remove, and to every pound of fruit add
three-quarters of a pound of granulated sugar and a half pint of
water; stew together over a moderate but steady fire. be careful to
_cover_ and _not stir_ the fruit, but shake the  vessel. if
attention to these particulars be given the berries will retain their
shape to quite an extent, which materially adds to their appearance on
the table. boil from five to seven minutes; remove from the fire; turn
into a deep dish, and set aside to cool. if strained sauce be
preferred, one and a half pounds of fruit should be stewed in one pint
of water for ten or fifteen minutes or until quite soft; then strain
through a colander or fine wire sieve; add three quarters of a pound
of sugar and return to the fire and boil three minutes, stirring
constantly; set away to cool, when it will be ready for use.




eggs


plain omelet with eight eggs.

from mrs. l. brace shattuck, of chicago, lady manager.

beat separately and very lightly the whites and yolks of eight eggs.
to one tablespoon of flour add one-half teaspoon of baking powder and
one-half cup of sweet milk. add the beaten yolks and lastly the beaten
whites of the eggs. have ready a hot frying pan, with a generous
amount of melted butter, into which pour, a cupful at a time, the
mixture. as soon as it _sets_, lift carefully the one half over
upon the other, and when done remove to a hot plate and serve
immediately. this omelet is exceedingly light and is sufficient for
four or five persons.


green corn omelet.

from mrs. frances p. burrows, of michigan, alternate lady manager.

grate twelve ears of boiled corn. beat five eggs until light and stir
into the corn; season with pepper and salt, and one tablespoon butter;
fry until brown. if fried in small cakes with a little flour and milk
stirred in to make a batter, it will be found excellent.


omelet with ham.

from mrs. naomi t. compton, of new jersey, alternate lady manager.

have a teacupful of very finely minced ham prepared for use as soon as
the eggs are ready. beat the whites of eight eggs separately and have
the yolks beaten the same length of time as the whites. we always put
the eggs in the refrigerator over night if the omelet is to be used
for breakfast, for the eggs will beat much better if thoroughly cold.
we use the same amount of flour and milk as of ham, but moisten the
flour with milk until it is of the consistency of cream, pouring in
the milk and flour with the yolks of the eggs. add lastly the whites,
beaten stiff, alternating with the finely minced ham and whites, until
all are combined. do not stir around in one direction, but lift the
yellow mixture up through and into the white. get it into the oven as
soon as possible, which must be blazing hot. if baked in a bread tin
it will usually rise to double the amount. if you prefer baking on the
top of a stove, have your frying pan hot, with plenty of butter, and
turn the omelet as soon as the edges are cooked. great care must be
taken not to have the pan keep too hot after the cooking begins, for
nothing burns so quickly as egg, and if scorched the delicate flavor
is lost. plain flour can be used with the proper proportions of baking
powder.

omelet must be eaten directly after it comes from the fire to be
tasted at its best. a little chopped parsley may be added as a
flavoring, but it need not he chopped so finely as the ham.


omelet--plain.

from miss mary e. busselle, of new jersey, lady manager.

four eggs, well beaten; four tablespoons milk; two tablespoons melted
butter. bake in a quick oven, in buttered round jelly tins, and when
browned, turn half over and send to the table hot.


stuffed eggs.

from mrs. ralph trautmann, of new york city, first vice-president
board of lady managers.

boil twelve eggs for twenty minutes; cut in halves; take out the yolks
and mash to a paste, adding one onion chopped fine, butter size of an
egg, one-half cup of milk, a little chopped parsley, with salt and
pepper to taste. mix well; roll this paste into balls and refill the
empty halves, joining the cut eggs together again with the white of a
raw egg. roll the stuffed eggs in beaten yolk and cracker crumbs, and
brown in boiling lard, same as crullers. drain well and serve on toast
or lettuce leaves.


deviled eggs for luncheon or picnics.

from mrs. isabella laning candee, of illinois, alternate lady manager.

boil any number of eggs very hard, turning over carefully in the water
several times to prevent their being unevenly cooked; put into cold
water a few moments and then take off shells; cut in halves carefully
and take out the yolks; mash these fine with a silver spoon (use a
_silver_ knife for cutting and filling) and add to them as much
good mayonnaise dressing as may be required to make a smooth paste
with which fill the empty halves; put them evenly together, fasten
with toothpicks, and wrap each egg in white tissue paper and put in
the ice chest until ready to serve.


escalloped eggs.

from mrs. helen a. peck, of missouri, alternate lady manager-at-
large.

escalloped eggs makes a savory dish and this is how to prepare them:
put half a dozen eggs into a sauce pan of boiling water and keep the
pan where it will be hot for half an hour, but not where the water
will boil. at the end of the prescribed time lay the eggs in cold
water for five minutes, and then remove the shells. cut the whites
into thin slices and rub the yolks through a coarse sieve. mix both
parts lightly, and after putting the mixture into an escallop dish
pour over it a sauce made as follows: put two tablespoonfuls of butter
into a frying pan, and when it has been melted add a heaping
tablespoonful of flour. stir until the mixture is smooth and frothy,
then gradually add a pint of cold milk. boil up once and season with
salt and pepper. after pouring the sauce over the eggs spread a large
cupful of grated bread crumbs on top of the dish and cook for fifteen
minutes in a hot oven. if care be taken to prevent the eggs from
boiling at any time during the thirty minutes the dish will be
delicate and digestible.


how to take egg.

from mrs. naomi t. compton, of new jersey, alternate lady manager.

have never seen this recipe for preparing an egg for invalids or
convalescents, so i venture to add it on account of its excellence.
some people dislike the taste of raw egg, and would find it palatable
in other ways than beaten up with wine, or taken in a glass of
sweetened milk. prepare a cup of coffee to the taste, with cream and
sugar, keeping it very hot until ready for the egg, which must be
beaten thoroughly in another cup, and the prepared coffee added by
degrees to the egg; drink it hot, and you will never want to take
coffee again without the addition of egg.




salad


lobster salad.

from mrs. charles price, of north carolina, third vice president,
board of lady managers.

lobsters are done when they assume a red color, which will only
require a few minutes hard boiling. remove the skin and bones, pick to
pieces with a fork, marinate them, _i.e._, place in a dish and
season with salt, pepper and a little oil, plenty of vinegar and a
little onion cut up; then cover and let stand two or three hours. cut
up hard boiled eggs for a border, line the bottom of the dish with
lettuce leaves, place the lobster on the dish in a ring. mayonnaise
can be used if desired, but the lobster is excellent without it.


chicken salad.

from mrs. a. m. palmer, of new york, alternate lady manager.

ingredients: one fowl (boiled); one cucumber; two heads lettuce; two
beets (boiled). dressing made according to the following recipe: one
teaspoonful mixed mustard; one-half teaspoonful  sugar; four
tablespoonfuls salad oil; four tablespoonfuls milk;  two
tablespoonfuls vinegar; cayenne and salt to taste; add  the oil, drop
by drop, to the mustard and sugar, mixing carefully;  next add milk
and vinegar _very gradually_, lest the  sauce curdle, and the
seasoning. place the shredded chicken  on a bed of lettuce, and pour
the dressing over it. around the  edge arrange rings of hard boiled
eggs, sliced cucumber and  beet root.


southern chicken salad. splendid--try it once.

from mrs. charles j. mcclung, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

cut one chicken into small pieces (not too small); boil _one_ egg
hard and pulverize the yolk (cut the white into the chicken); add the
beaten yolks of _three_ raw eggs; one-half teaspoonful  each of
ground mustard, white pepper, salt, sugar and celery  salt or seed,
the juice of one lemon, one tablespoonful  melted butter, one
tablespoonful salad oil (some prefer all butter); beat all well
together until light and pour into one gill of boiling vinegar and let
all cook until thick as cream, stirring constantly to avoid curdling.
when _cold_ pour over your chicken,  to which has been added as
much chopped celery, and salt  and pepper to taste.


chicken salad.

from mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe, of arkansas, alternate lady manager.

as the irishman would say, turkey makes the best chicken salad. boil
till well done. use only the white meat, which cut with sharp scissors
into pieces about one-half inch square; add an equal quantity of
celery cut in same manner, sprinkling over it salt and pepper. put in
a cold place till two hours before serving, when add the following
dressing: for one chicken take three eggs, one cup of vinegar, one cup
of sweet milk, one-half cup butter, one tablespoon made mustard, salt,
black and red pepper, beat eggs, melt butter; stir all together over a
slow fire till it thickens; when cool beat into it one cup of cream.
serve salad on crisp, well-bleached lettuce leaves, on the top of each
putting a small quantity of the following mayonnaise dressing: the
yolks of two uncooked eggs, one tablespoon salt, beat with an
eggbeater, adding gradually pure olive oil till one pint is used. when
the mixture becomes too thick add, as required, one teaspoon of
vinegar or lemon juice. if the oil is well incorporated by thorough
beating, this dressing will keep an indefinite time.


vegetable salad.

from mrs. florence h. kidder, of north carolina, lady manager.

one pint of cold boiled potatoes, cut in slices; one-third the
quantity of cold boiled beets cut _fine_; one-third the quantity
of green peas (winter beets and canned peas are as good  as fresh
ones); sprinkle with salt and pepper, then pour over it a french
dressing made of a saltspoonful of salt, one of black pepper, a
teaspoonful of onion juice or grated onion, three tablespoonfuls of
olive oil and one of vinegar; mix thoroughly and set aside. when ready
to serve spread over it a thick mayonnaise dressing and garnish with
slices of beet, cut in shapes, hard boiled egg and parsley; if made in
summer a border of crisp lettuce leaves is an additional garnish. if
the quantity of vegetable is increased the amount of dressing must
also be doubled or the salad will be dry. a small portion of the
mayonnaise mixed with the vegetables also is an improvement.


string bean salad. (french recipe.)

from mrs. caroline e. dennis, of new york state, alternate lady
manager-at-large.

string the beans and boil them whole; when boiled tender and they have
become cold, slice them lengthwise, cutting each bean into four long
slices; season them an hour or two before serving, with a marinade of
a little pepper, salt, and three spoonfuls of vinegar to one spoonful
of oil. just before serving, drain from them any drops of superfluous
liquid that may have collected and carefully mix them with a french
dressing. this makes a delicious salad.

_french salad dressing_--one tablespoon of vinegar; three
tablespoons of olive oil; one saltspoon of pepper, and one saltspoon
of salt. (this is half a spoon too much pepper for  americans.) add a
trifle of onion, scraped fine, or rubbed on  the salad bowl, if it is
desired at all. pour the oil, mixed with  the pepper and salt, over
the salad; mix them well together;  then add the vinegar, and mix
again. serve on a leaf of crisp lettuce.


excellent potato salad.

from mrs. genevieve m. guthrie, of oklahoma, lady manager.

for four or six people. cut into dice six medium sized potatoes
(boiled); three medium onions; salt and pepper them to taste; pour
over and mix well the following dressing: three well beaten eggs,
three large tablespoonfuls of strong vinegar, a lump of butter size of
a walnut, pinch of salt, pepper and mustard (unmixed); put on the
stove and cook to a thin custard, stirring constantly.


tomato salad.

from mrs. mira b. f. ladd, of new hampshire, lady manager.

six tomatoes, one-half cup of mayonnaise dressing, the crisp part of
one head of lettuce. peel the tomatoes and put them on the ice until
they are very cold; make the mayonnaise and stand it on the ice until
wanted; wash and dry the lettuce. when ready to serve, cut the
tomatoes in halves, make twelve little nests with two or three salad
leaves each, arrange on the dish, place half a tomato in each nest,
put a tablespoonful of mayonnaise on each tomato and serve
immediately.


tomato salad. (for use when fresh tomatoes are not in the market.)

from miss mary crease sears, of massachusetts, alternate lady manager.

rub through a coarse sieve one can of tomatoes; cover with cold water
a half box of cox gelatine and let it stand a half hour or more; then
pour in enough hot water to thoroughly dissolve it; then mix with one
full pint of the strained tomatoes; add a little salt; pour into small
round moulds and put in a cool place to harden. serve on lettuce
leaves with mayonnaise dressing.


cabbage salad.

from mrs. theresa j. cochran, of vermont, alternate lady manager.

mix together one-half cup of sugar, one teaspoonful of mustard, one
teaspoonful of salt, one-half teaspoonful black pepper; then add three
well beaten eggs, one-half cup of vinegar, six tablespoonfuls of
cream, three of butter. cook the same as boiled custard in a kettle of
water; when cold add the cabbage chopped fine.

fish salad.

from mrs. mary c. bell, of florida, lady manager.

pour boiling water over a large mackerel and let stand for ten
minutes; take out and dry thoroughly by draining on a sieve or clean
towel. remove the head, tail and fins, and skin and bones. shred the
fish finely and mix with one large onion, well chopped. add mustard,
vinegar, and pepper to taste. serve as salad, with young lettuce
leaves, and garnish with hard-boiled eggs, sliced. this is a
delightful relish with thin-sliced bread and butter, and is called
"salmagundi."


salad dressing.

from miss loraine pearce bucklin, of rhode island, alternate lady
manager.

three eggs, beat yolks and whites separately. to the beaten yolks add
one tablespoonful of mustard, two tablespoonfuls of sugar, one
teaspoonful of salt. to the beaten whites of the eggs add one cup of
cream; beat this thoroughly together, pour the yolks, mustard, sugar
and salt into this and put the dish containing it over the teakettle
when the water boils. when the mixture begins to harden around the
edge, pour in a cup of vinegar; stir it all the time it is over the
kettle. after you add the vinegar take it from the heat and set in a
dish of cold water to cool.




doughnuts & fritters


famous doughnuts

from miss frances e. willard, of illinois, lady manager.

_to tell you the truth, i never knew anything about cooking or had a
particle of taste for it, but i will send you the recipe for her
famous 'doughnuts,' written out by my beloved mother, and i think
about the last communication she ever prepared for the press; it was
in march of last year. there is nothing specially valuable about the
recipe except that it is good and decidedly old-fashioned. i used to
think there was nothing so toothsome as mother's 'fried cakes,' for so
we called them on the old wisconsin farm.

believe me, yours, with all good wishes,  frances e. willard_


take a little over one pint of rich, sweet milk, into which put two-
thirds of a teacup of sugar and a little salt. sift as much flour as
you think will be required, into which mix four heaping teaspoonfuls
of best baking powder. stir into the milk and sugar six tablespoonfuls
of very hot fresh lard, pour the mixture into the flour and make a
sponge. when cooled sufficiently to prevent cooking the egg add one
egg slightly beaten. mix to a proper consistency, roll and cut into
rings. it is hard to give a recipe where so much depends upon the
judgment and care of the cook. much depends upon having the lard in
which the doughnuts are fried very hot before they are put in,
otherwise they "soak up the fat" and are heavy.


raised doughnuts.

from mrs. ellen m. chandler, of vermont, lady manager.

one pint warmed milk, one cup sugar, one-half cup yeast, one-half
teaspoon salt; mix about 10 a.m., let rise four hours then add: one
cup sugar, two eggs, one-fourth cup lard, one-fourth cup butter. knead
and let rise in warm place until night, then roll thin and cut out;
let rise over night in warm place and fry in the morning.


doughnuts.

from mrs. laura e. howey, of montana, secretary state board and lady
manager.

beat well together one egg, one cup sweet milk, one cup sugar (small
cup), large teaspoonful of baking powder, sprinkle in two cups flour,
piece butter size of an egg, pinch of salt. knead soft, cook in
skillet well filled with lard just to the boiling point; place in
dripping pan, so that they may not get soggy with the grease while
cooling off.


doughnuts.  from miss annie m. mahan, of west virginia, alternate lady
manager.

one-half cup of butter, one cup of sour milk, one and one-half cup of
sugar, four eggs, one teaspoon soda (in milk), nutmeg, flour to make
it stiff enough to roll.


callas. a creole cake eaten hot with coffee.

from mrs. belle h. perkins, of louisiana, president of state board,
lady manager.

one teacup of rice well boiled and mashed, one small coffee cup of
sugar, two tablespoons yeast, three eggs and flour sufficient to make
a thick batter; beat the whole well together and fry in hot lard. be
careful not to have the batter too thin, or it will not fry well.


apple fritters.

from mrs. m. p. hart, of ohio, president of state board and lady
manager.

make a batter with one cup sweet milk, one teaspoonful sugar, two
eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, two cups flour, one
teaspoonful baking powder mixed with flour. chop some good tart
apples, mix them in the batter and fry in hot lard. serve them with
maple syrup.


corn fritters.

from mrs. e. v. mcconnell, of north dakota, lady manager

two eggs, one tablespoon of cream or sweet milk, one cup oyster
crackers rolled fine, one can or six ears of sweet corn scraped from
the cob, pepper and salt to taste. put tablespoon butter in frying
pan, have it hot and drop in batter by spoonfuls. fry brown and serve
hot for breakfast.


clam fritters.

from mrs. sallie s. cotten, of north carolina, president state board
and alternate lady manager.

open as oysters and chop fine. make a stiff batter of eggs and flour,
with a little black pepper. stir into this batter the chopped clams
and a little of the clam liquor, if necessary to make the batter the
proper consistency. fry in hot butter or lard.


white corn meal cakes for breakfast. (a rhode island dish.)

from mrs. sarah s.c. angell, of michigan, lady manager.

one pint white corn meal, into which you stir two saltspoonfuls salt.
gradually moisten this with boiling water until the mixture is
somewhat thicker than hasty pudding. stir constantly and after the
right consistency is attained, beat thoroughly for two minutes. drop
from spoon into boiling lard and fry for five or six minutes. serve
immediately. it is of absolute importance that the water should be
_boiling_ and _kept_ so, and therefore it is wise to bring
the mixing dish very near the stove when the teakettle is heated. the
same paste may be fried on a griddle like buckwheat cakes, but the
first method makes the crispest, nuttiest flavor. this recipe makes
bannocks enough for six people.


corn griddle cakes or old virginia slap jacks.

from miss lily irene jackson, of west virginia, lady manager.

one or two eggs, whites beaten to a froth; one quart of sweet milk;
pinch of salt; meal enough to make a thin batter. bake very thin on
hot griddle and serve at once. meal must not be too finely ground or
bolted.


fried mush.

from mrs. george hoxworth, of arizona, alternate lady manager.

three pints boiling water; one cup wheat flour; enough corn meal to
make stiff batter. fry while hot in plenty of grease. think it more
convenient than the old way and much better. a tablespoonful of sugar
added makes it brown better.


superior waffles.

from mrs. mary b.p. black, of west virginia, alternate lady manager.

one quart of buttermilk; one pint of sweet new milk; four eggs, beaten
separately; little salt; teaspoonful soda, dissolved in half teacup
sour cream or buttermilk, and enough flour to make the dough of proper
consistency. sift your flour; begin with three pints, you may need
less or more. add buttermilk (sour cream will do instead), then sweet
milk; then yolks of eggs, well beaten; then soda, having dissolved it
in half teacupful of buttermilk or sour cream; add more flour now,
should it be needed; lastly, whites of eggs, beaten to a stiff froth
and stirred gently into the thin dough. let the cook be careful to
fill the iron scantily half full, to bake, as these beautiful waffles
to be crisp and tender must have ample space to rise.


mexican enchiladas

from mrs. franc luse albright, of new mexico, lady manager.

1. to make the tortillas for the enchiladas, take one quart of blue
corn meal mixed with water and salt, making a batter stiff enough to
flatten out into round cakes, and bake on the bare hot lid.

2. to make the chili sauce: one cup of tepid water; three
tablespoonfuls of ground chili; let boil down to a batter.

3. filling for tortillas: grated cheese and chopped onions, very fine.

dip into a pan of boiling hot lard one tortilla; then dip this
tortilla into the chili batter; then sprinkle with the filling, first
the cheese and then the onion. then put on one spoonful of chili
batter and lay like a layer cake as many cakes as desired, and then
pour over the chili batter. cut like cake and serve hot.




preserves


tomato conserve.

from mrs. caroline e. dennis, of new york state, alternate lady
manager-at-large.

three pounds of sugar, to three pounds of tomatoes; add two lemons,
peeled and sliced _very_ thin; sliver the peel into smallest bits
and add, with two inches of preserved ginger root, also cut very fine.
put tomatoes in a kettle, mash with a spoon, mix in the sugar, lemons
and ginger, and boil slowly for _three_ hours, or until the
preserve is of the consistency of marmalade. this is a new and very
choice sweetmeat; and, so far as we know, is not to be found in any
other recipe-book.


orange marmalade.  from mrs. governor oglesby, of illinois, lady
manager.

one dozen imperial oranges (good pulp and thick yellow skin); their
scant weight in sugar. peel six and grate the yellow rind without the
white skin. slice the peel from the other six into thin shreds; boil
in three waters till very tender. chop the oranges, removing all tough
fibres and seeds; put on, with the juice that drains from the oranges,
the sugar, a little water and the drained orange peel shreds; boil
fifteen minutes, thon add the pulp and grated rind and boil twenty
minutes.


compote of apples.

from mrs. hattie e. sladden, of oregon, alternate lady manager.

make a syrup of one quart of water and one pint of white sugar. pare
and core (without breaking) six tart apples; stew in syrup until
tender. remove the apples to a deep glass dish; then add to the syrup
a box of gelatine and cinnamon stick. when thoroughly dissolved, pour
over the apples, first removing the cinnamon bark.


steamed peaches.

from mrs. w. newton linch, of went virginia, lady manager.

place the fruit in a steamer and allow it to remain until skin can be
removed, as that from a scalded tomato. make a strong syrup of
granulated sugar; place the peaches in the jar, pour the syrup over
them very hot and seal at once. steamed peaches make a delightful dish
for lunch during their season. do not make the syrup quite so strong
and allow the peaches to get very cold before serving.


quince preserves.

from mrs. m.p. hart, of ohio, president of state board and lady
manager.

pare and core the quinces. put the parings and cores into a kettle
with sufficient water to cover them, and let them boil for a short
time. then strain and pour the liquid over the quinces. let the
quinces cook until they are soft before adding the sugar. the quinces
and syrup must be boiled until they become transparent and of a rich
color. the rule is one pound of sugar to a pound of fruit; a less
quantity of sugar will be sufficient if the fruit should be well
cooked and carefully sealed.


watermelon preserves.

from mrs. h.k. ingram, of florida, alternate lady manager.

take a thick rind of a ripe watermelon. cut into small strips, or any
desirable fancy shapes; cut off all the red inside part and scrape off
all the hard outside shell. boil the pieces in water with peach or
grape leaves and soda, in the proportion of a dozen leaves and a
teaspoonful of soda to two quarts of water. when tender, take them out
of the water and put them in cold water that has had half a large
spoonful of alum dissolved in it. they will then become brittle and
green. let them soak in the alum water for an hour; then rinse in
clear, cold water, and boil in a syrup made of equal weight of white
sugar. boil with them lemons cut in thin slices, allowing one lemon to
two pounds of rind. boil fifteen or twenty minutes. when a little
cool, add a little essence of ginger, or if not the essence, boil in
the syrup with the rinds a little green or ground ginger tied in bits
of thin cloth. after three or four days pour the syrup off and boil
down to a rich syrup that will just cover the rinds, and pour it over
them scalding hot.


blackberry jam.

from mrs. mary s. mcneal, of oklahoma, alternate lady manager.

put the fruit into a preserving kettle and boil fifteen or twenty
minutes, stirring often and skimming off any scum that may rise; then
add sugar in the proportion of three-fourths pound of sugar to one
pound of fruit. boil thirty minutes longer, stirring continually; when
done, pour into small jars or jelly glasses.


canned spiced blackberries.

from mrs. h.j. peto, of arizona, alternate lady manager

wash the berries carefully and drain in a colander. for each quart of
fruit add two cups granulated sugar and one-half cup of pure cider
vinegar. put all in a porcelain lined sauce pan, set on the stove and
scald thoroughly; then add one-half dozen cloves and one and one-half
ounces stick cinnamon for each quart of berries. while the fruit is
hot, pour into glass jars and cover at once; it will be ready for use
in three or four days. a delicious relish.


spiced green grapes.

from mrs. george a. mumford, of rhode island, alternate lady manager.

five pounds green grapes (wild are best); three pounds sugar; one
pound raisins; one-half pint vinegar; one tablespoonful ground cloves;
one tablespoonful ground allspice; one tablespoonful ground cinnamon.
stone the grapes and raisins; simmer one hour.


orange jelly.

from mrs. theresa j. cochran, of vermont, alternate lady manager.

grate the yellow rinds of two oranges and two lemons and squeeze the
juice into a porcelain lined preserving kettle, adding the juice of
two more oranges and removing all the seeds; put in the grated rind a
quarter of a pound of sugar, or more if the fruit is sour, and a gill
of water, and boil these ingredients together until a rich syrup is
formed; meantime dissolve two ounces of gelatine in a quart of warm
water, stirring it over the fire until it is entirely dissolved; then
add the syrup, strain the jelly, and cool it in molds wet in cold
water.--_white house cook book._


currant jelly.

prom mrs. m.p.h. beeson, of oklahoma, lady manager.

one-half cup sugar to one cup currant juice. boil for fifteen minutes.
this will make a lovely jelly.


crab apple jelly.

from mrs. genevieve m. guthrie, of oklahoma, lady manager.

wash and quarter large siberian crabs, but do not core; cover to the
depth of an inch or two with cold water and cook to a mush; pour into
a coarse cotton bag or strainer, and, when cool enough, press or
squeeze hard to extract all of the juice. take a piece of fine swiss
muslin or crinoline, wring out of water, spread over colander placed
over a crock, and with a cup dip the juice slowly in, allowing plenty
of time to run through; repeat this process twice, rinsing the muslin
frequently. allow the strained juice of four lemons to a peck of
apples and three-quarters of a pound of sugar to each pint of juice.
boil the juice from ten to twenty minutes; while boiling, sift in the
sugar slowly, stirring constantly, and boil five minutes longer. this
is generally sufficient, but it is always safer to "try it" and
ascertain whether it will jelly. this will make a clear, sparkling
jelly.--_from practical housekeeping cook book._

the jelly is excellent.




pickles and catsup


pickled onions.

from mrs. harriet a. lucas, of pennsylvania, lady manager

peel carefully, by scalding, small onions; drain; place in salt and
water, not too strong, for forty-eight hours; then drain again till
dry. put together one-half pint of milk and one-half pint water; place
the small onions in it and allow them to scald, _not_ boil, or
they will be softened. remove, rinse in cold water and drain. place in
a jar and pour over them white wine vinegar, with a little mace and
small red peppers; no dark spice. you will have a beautifully white,
mild pickled onion if this is carried out.


oil pickles.  from mrs. ida. m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

two dozen large cucumbers, sliced without paring; sprinkle with salt;
place in a colander to drain for two or three hours. one dozen onions
prepared in the same way, separately. put in a stone jar, in alternate
layers, sprinkling between with ground black pepper and a mixture of
mustard and oil, the mixture to be made in the proportion of a small
box of mustard to one-half pint of salad oil. when the jar is full,
pour in enough cold vinegar to cover.


mixed pickles.

from mrs. sam. s. fifield, of wisconsin, lady manager.

take small cucumbers, onions, beans, cauliflower, broken up, and pour
over boiling hot brine made of one teacup of coarse salt to a gallon
of water, for three mornings. the fourth morning drain well. (i put
into a flour sack and hang out doors until dry.) to one gallon of good
cider vinegar put a teaspoon of pulverized alum, four of white mustard
seed, two of celery seed, five or six tiny red peppers, a handful of
cloves and as much of stick cinnamon; pour over the pickles when real
hot; add a good quantity of horseradish root to keep pickles from
moulding.


cucumber pickles.

from mrs. parthenia p. rue, of california, lady manager.

for two gallons of pickles, place the cucumbers in salt and water for
three days; then rinse in fresh water. one teacupful of whole white
mustard; one handful of whole cloves; allspice and black pepper; a
teacupful of broken cinnamon. put all into a large thin bag and boil
in one quart vinegar. put two or three red pepper pods and a few
sprigs of horseradish root among the cucumbers, in a keg or jar. take
sufficient vinegar to cover them and put into it one pound of brown
sugar; let it scald and cool a little; then pour over the pickles;
then the spices and vinegar, allowing the spices to remain on top. the
spices and vinegar must be poured off and scalded for five mornings,
and, when cool, poured over the pickles; the last day pour over a cup
of molasses. use good cider vinegar. if desired sweeter, sugar to
vinegar when heating. cucumbers used late in the season make better
pickles than the earlier ones. put cucumbers in salt water when
freshly picked.


green cucumber pickle.

from mrs. cora payne jackson, of kentucky, lady manager.

one gallon of cider vinegar; one pound of brown sugar; one tablespoon
of allspice; one tablespoon of cloves; one tablespoon of black pepper;
one tablespoon of mace; two tablespoons of root ginger; two
tablespoons of celery; two tablespoons of white mustard; one handful
of horseradish. after it begins to boil add cold cucumbers, well
soaked, and boil until tender enough to pierce with a fork.


ripe cucumber pickle.

from miss mary elliott mccandless, of pennsylvania, lady manager.

slice twenty-five large cucumbers in pieces between one and two inches
thick; lay in salt water two days; wash out the salt. boil in alum
water half an hour, alum size of a walnut (english); take out and boil
in ginger water an hour; one ounce of ginger and water to cover. make
a syrup of five pounds of light brown sugar, three quarts of vinegar,
one pint of water, two ounces of whole cloves, two ounces of stick
cinnamon, half an ounce of whole allspice, half an ounce of mace (put
spices in bags). let all boil until a rich syrup, then put in the
cucumbers and boil between one and two hours.


gooseberry catsup.

from mrs. amey m. starkweather, of rhode island, superintendent state
work and lady manager.

nine pounds of gooseberries; add five pounds of sugar, one quart of
vinegar, three tablespoonfuls of cinnamon, one and one-half each of
allspice and cloves. the gooseberries should be nearly or quite ripe.
take off the blossoms, wash, and put them into a porcelain kettle,
scald, then put through a colander, add the sugar and spices; boil
fifteen minutes; then add the vinegar; bottle immediately before it
cools. almost any recipe for spiced gooseberries makes a good recipe
when the gooseberries are put through a colander or coarse sieve, and
the vinegar added, cooled in this way.

if you wish a smaller recipe, use the following: to four quarts of
fruit, take three pounds of sugar, one pint of vinegar, one
tablespoonful each of ground cloves, allspice and cinnamon. make as in
the above recipe.


cabbage pickle.

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

quarter small, hard heads of cabbage, removing the outer leaves; put
in a brine for three days, then let it soak in fresh water six hours.
wipe perfectly dry, squeezing the water out. scald the cabbage in weak
vinegar and water, to which add turmeric in a thin muslin bag. then
put into a stone jar alternate layers of cabbage and seasoning as
follows: mace, ginger, cinnamon, white mustard seeds, onions, red
pepper, and horse radish. bring to a boil enough good cider vinegar to
cover the whole, and pour into the jar hot.


picalilly.

from mrs. ella ray miller, of idaho, alternate lady manager.

one peck green tomatoes; twelve large onions; one ounce each of
allspice, cloves, cinnamon, whole pepper and white mustard seed; two
ounces flour of mustard, one and one-half pound sugar. slice and salt
tomatoes, drain over night. put spices in bags, cover all with
vinegar, and boil till tender. seal in glass jars.


sweet pickled peaches.

from mrs. nellie b. plumer, of pennsylvania, alternate lady manager.

ten pounds peaches--pared; five pounds sugar; one quart best cider
vinegar; one tablespoonful allspice; one tablespoonful mace; one
tablespoonful cinnamon; one teaspoonful cloves. put the spices in thin
muslin bags. boil all together half hour; then put in the peaches, and
boil twenty minutes. take out the fruit with a skimmer, and spread
upon dishes to cool. boil the syrup until thick, pack the peaches in
glass jars, and pour syrup over them scalding hot.


chow-chow pickles.

from mrs. h.k. ingram, of florida, alternate lady manager.

one-half peck green tomatoes; one dozen peppers; two heads cabbage
(medium size); one-half peck onions; one-fourth peck cucumbers. chop
fine (or, better still, run through a sausage grinder), and mix
thoroughly with three handfuls of salt. pour all into a thin bag to
drain for twelve hours, or over night. at the end of this time put
sufficient vinegar to cover into a large iron, tin or porcelain
vessel, and add two ounces black pepper grains, two ounces allspice
grains, two ounces celery seed, one-fourth pound mustard, one pound
sugar. scald the vinegar and pour contents of bag into it; add the
spices, mix well, and let all come to a boil, and remove instantly.
this will be found equal to the best imported bottled chow-chow.


mustard chow-chow.

from mrs. alice b. castleman, of kentucky, alternate lady manager.

two dozen cucumbers, cut in chunks about an inch thick; two heads of
cabbage, chopped fine. sprinkle with salt and let stand all night. one
dozen large green peppers, chopped up; five dozen small seed onions.
soak the onions and peppers separately in salt water all night; next
morning squeeze all the salt water from them. then place in a kettle a
layer of pickle and a layer of seasoning composed of two ounces of
white mustard seed; two ounces celery seed; one ounce turmeric; one-
half pound box of coleman's mustard, mixed smooth with vinegar, adding
two and one-half pounds brown sugar. after putting all in the kettle,
cover with vinegar and boil thirty minutes, this recipe makes two
gallons of pickles, and one and one half gallons of vinegar covers it.
use best cider vinegar.


chow-chow.

from miss mary elliott mccandless, of pennsylvania, lady manager.

one peck green tomatoes; two large heads of cabbage; two good sized
onions; three small red peppers; one-fourth pound yellow mustard seed;
one-fourth pound ground mustard; one and one-half ounces celery seed;
one tablespoonful cayenne pepper, three quarts best vinegar; one quart
granulated sugar. slice tomatoes, salt them, then chop very fine, and
drain all green water off; put the chopped tomatoes on in a preserving
kettle, with some good vinegar, bring them to the scald, then pour in
colander to drain and cool. chop cabbage, onions and peppers fine, and
_when the tomatoes are cold_, mix all together. bring to boil
vinegar, sugar, mustard seed, celery seed, red pepper and more salt.
mix ground mustard with chopped tomatoes, cabbage, etc. when the
vinegar, sugar, etc., is cold, pour on the chopped mixture; stir
thoroughly and put in wide-mouthed bottles.




cheese


cheese fonda.

from miss hattie t. hundley, of alabama, lady manager.

one cup of bread crumbs, very dry and fine; two scant cups of milk;
one-half pound of old cheese, grated; three eggs, whipped very light,
and one tablespoonful of butter. season with pepper and salt and a
pinch of soda dissolved in hot water and stirred into the milk. soak
the crumbs in the milk, beat with these the eggs, butter, seasoning,
and lastly the cheese; put into a buttered baking dish, put dry bread
crumbs on top and bake in a rather quick oven until a delicate brown.
serve immediately.--_mrs. henderson's cook book_.


cheese sticks.

from mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe, of arkansas, alternate lady manager.

six tablespoons of grated cheese; two tablespoons of melted butter;
enough flour to make a soft dough. roll thin, cut in strips and bake
in floured pan in quick oven.




pies


lemon pie.

from mrs. l. m. n. stevens, of maine, lady manager.

one cup sugar; juice of one lemon; one egg and yolks of two eggs; one
dessertspoonful rolled cracker, scalded in two-thirds cup milk. bake
in a deep plate. after baking frost with the whites of two eggs beaten
stiff, adding two spoonfuls of sugar. brown the frosting a little.


ideal lemon pie.

from mrs. ida l. turner, of texas, lady manager.

make the crust, line pie tin and bake. while it is baking prepare the
following filling: grate one lemon (do not roll it); after the yellow
rind is all grated, squeeze in the juice and if any little cells go
in, do not say them nay; then put in a cupful of sugar and the yolks
of two eggs; stir well together; upon this pour a large cupful of cold
water, into which has been stirred a dessertspoonful of corn starch;
put all into a sauce pan and stir until it is cooked into a rich,
clear, straw-colored jelly. then fill the crust and from the whites of
the eggs make a meringue to cover each. put into the oven for one
brief instant.


lemon pie.

from mrs. virginia c. meredith, of indiana, lady manager and vice-
chairman of executive committee.

two cups of sugar; one cup of boiling water; four eggs; two lemons;
one and one-half tablespoon flour. stir the sugar and flour well
together; add the juice and grated rind of the lemons; to this add the
well beaten yolks; after stirring well, add the boiling water; put
over a clear fire and stir constantly until it boils, then pour into
the shells. spread over the top a meringue made of the whites of the
four eggs and one tablespoon of sugar; place in the oven and brown
slightly. this is sufficient for two pies. the shells should he made
of ordinary pie pastry and baked before being filled with the mixture.


lemon pie.

from miss lucia b. perea, of new mexico, alternate lady manager.

one and one-half cups of sugar; one cup of water; two tablespoonfuls
flour or corn starch; one tablespoonful butter; yolks of three eggs;
two lemons, grated; add juice, beat well all together, then boil until
thick. beat up one cup of pulverized sugar with the whites of three
eggs. pour over the pie when done, and brown.


pumpkin pie.

from mrs. frances c. holley, of north dakota, alternate lady manager.

pare pumpkin, cut into inch pieces; steam till well done, or stew
until soft and dry; then sift through a wire sieve or colander. add
one well beaten egg for each pie, also one tablespoonful of cream, if
you have it, for each, together with sufficient milk to give the
required thickness when cooked. sugar and salt to your taste, flavor
with nutmeg, adding also a little ginger. use deep custard plates;
bake, rather slowly at first, until well thickened and nicely brown on
top.


apple custard pie.

from mrs. annie l. y. orff, of missouri, alternate lady manager.

one cup milk; yolks of two eggs; four grated apples; small spoon of
melted butter; one-half cup sugar; nutmeg to flavor; pinch of salt.
bake in one crust. make a frosting with whites of eggs and two spoons
of sugar. brown delicately.


cream pie.

from mrs. m. r. lee, of mississippi, lady manager.

put one-half pint milk and one-half cupful sugar in a frying pan and
let it come to a boil; then dissolve one tablespoonful corn starch in
a little milk reserved from the half pint. add to it the beaten yolk
of one egg, stir into the boiling milk, and when thickened and smooth,
remove and add a little salt and lemon flavoring. pour into a flaky
crust that has been just baked, and frost with the white of one egg
and one tablespoonful sugar; place in hot stove till a delicate brown.


cream pie

from mrs. louise campbell, of new mexico, alternate lady manager.

bake an undercrust. boil one pint of sweet milk; when boiling, stir in
one-quarter cup of corn starch, one-half a cup of sugar, and the yolks
of two eggs, which must be well beaten together. cook thoroughly,
flavor with vanilla, and add a little salt. pour this mixture into the
baked crust. beat the whites of the two eggs, and to them add half a
cup of sugar, and use as meringue.


apple pie.

from mrs. alice vineyard brown, of north dakota, alternate lady
manager.

sift into a chopping bowl three small caps of flour; then with the
knife chop in thoroughly one cup of lard, one-half cup of butter, that
have been on ice for an hour; mix with four to six tablespoons of ice
water, as may be needed to handle, roll thin and line a shell, into
which slice thinly any tart apples that will cook rather quickly.
dredge with the grated rind of a lemon--a somewhat dry lemon is
preferable--which has been mixed thoroughly with one tablespoon of
sugar and one small teaspoon of corn starch. now break an egg into a
howl, beat well and add four tablespoons of sugar and one cup of rich
milk; pour this over the apples; with the jag iron cut the remainder
of the paste into narrow strips and lay across to form squares. bake
in a moderate oven until the custard "sets." place on ice in summer;
eat slightly warm in winter.


pie crust.

from mrs. annie l, y. orff, of missouri, alternate lady manager.

one cup lard; one-half cup cold water; a pinch of salt, and flour
enough to roll. this will make exactly two pies.


mince meat.

from mrs. marcia louise gould, of illinois, president state board and
lady manager.

two pounds of lean fresh beef boiled; when cold chop fine; one pound
of beef suet cleared of strings and minced to a powder; five pounds of
apples, pared and chopped; two pounds of raisins, seeded and chopped;
one pound of sultana raisins, washed and picked over; two pounds of
currants, washed and _carefully_ picked over; three-quarters of a
pound of citron, chopped fine; two tablespoonfuls of cinnamon, one of
nutmeg (powdered), two of mace, one of cloves, one of allspice, one of
fine salt; two and a quarter pounds of brown sugar; one quart brown
sherry, and one pint best brandy or three pints of grape juice.


mince meat.

from mrs. laura f. coleman, of colorado, lady manager.

two pounds of beef; half pound suet; half pound butter; five pounds
apples; two pounds raisins; two pounds seedless raisins; half pound
citron; three tablespoonfuls cinnamon, two of mace, two of allspice;
one nutmeg; three pounds brown sugar; half gallon sweet cider. boil
beef until tender, then chop fine; also chop suet, apples and citron.
then mix all the ingredients thoroughly and boil until the apples are
cooked. after removing from the stove add one-half teacupful of brandy
if desired.




pudding


graham christmas pudding.

from mrs. rollin a. edgerton, of arkansas, secretary of state board
and lady manager.

_ the christmas pudding which i add was served up this christmas on
my table and pronounced delicious. dyspeptics need not fear this "plum
pudding" and it is rich enough to please the most fastidious.

wishing your philanthropic efforts every success, i am, very truly
yours,_

beat two eggs; take one-half cup of sweet milk; one-half cup of
molasses, in which dissolve one-half teaspoon of soda; a lump of
butter the size of an egg; one cup of graham flour (don't sift) two
cups of flour, in which a cup of stoned raisins are well rubbed; one
small teaspoon of salt; spice with cinnamon, cloves and nutmeg, one
teaspoonful all together. then steam two hours and serve with a hard
sauce of butter and fine sugar creamed together, with one well beaten
egg and grated nutmeg as a finish. wholesome, delicious, and extremely
simple to prepare.


graham pudding.

from mrs. george a. mumford, of rhode island, alternate lady manager.

one and one-half cups of graham flour; one cup of milk; one-half cup
of molasses; one cup of raisins, seeded and chopped; one teaspoonful
soda; one-half teaspoonful salt. sift the graham flour to make it
light, but return the bran. dissolve the soda in one tablespoonful of
the milk and add the remainder of the milk, molasses and salt. then
pour all the mixture on the graham flour, beating it thoroughly with a
spoon; then stir in the fruit (and spice if you wish). pour the
pudding into a well greased mould and steam four hours. serve with a
wine or any rich sauce.


lady ross fig pudding.

from mrs. wm. p. lynde, of wisconsin, lady manager.

three-quarters pound grated bread; one-half pound best figs, minced
fine; six ounces minced beef suet; six ounces sugar; one teacup sweet
milk; a little nutmeg; one egg. mix the bread and suet together; then
add figs, sugar and nutmeg; then the egg, well beaten; lastly the
milk. boil in a mould four hours.

_wine sauce_--two cups sugar; one-half cup butter. stir to a
cream; then add one glass of wine and some flavoring and a little
nutmeg; then pour in a small cup boiling water and set on the stove in
a pan or kettle of water and keep hot until served.


alexandre pudding.

from mrs. m. d. thatcher, of colorado, lady manager.

set a jelly mould on ice; put a layer of maraschino jelly (or any wine
jelly) in the bottom of the mould; when set, add a layer of pink jelly
(made by adding a drop of prepared cochineal); when set, put a lining
in the centre of the mould; if you have not the centre-form, use a
small tin baking-powder box, placing it in the centre of the mould;
then add alternate layers of the jellies until the mould is filled,
and when well set and firm, gently withdraw the lining (or can),
filling the hollow thus formed with a custard cream. when all is quite
firm, turn out on a dish and serve with whipped cream around the
pudding.


plum pudding.

from mrs. florence h. kidder, of north carolina, lady manager.

one and one-half pounds of stoned raisins, torn in half; one pound of
currants; one and one-half pounds of citron, cut fine; one and one-
quarter pounds of butter; one pound of sugar; eight eggs, well beaten;
one pound of stale bread crumbs; one and one-half pints of sweet milk,
boiled and poured on bread crumbs; two grated nutmegs; two tablespoons
of cinnamon; one tablespoon of mace, one of cloves and two of
allspice; eight tablespoons of sifted flour, rubbed in with fruit;
one-half pint of french brandy and one-half pint of madeira or sherry.
have a bag two thicknesses of white unbleached cloth; grease and flour
the inside well; pour in mixture, tie tightly to exclude water, and
leave room for pudding to swell. put in a pot of boiling water, which
must be kept boiling for five hours. put plate in bottom of pot to
prevent sticking. the bag must be turned repeatedly and kept under
water.

_sauce for plum pudding_--butter and powdered sugar, thoroughly
stirred, and seasoned with wine and nutmeg. when pudding is ready to
serve, pour alcohol over it and set on fire.

this recipe makes a large pudding, but it can be packed away with
brandy poured over it, and can be used by steaming over as long as it
lasts.


english plum pudding.

from mrs. phoebe m. hartpence, of ohio, chairman committee on woman's
work, lady manager.

one cup molasses; one cup sour milk; one cup suet, chopped fine; one
cup raisins; one-half cup currants; two and one-half cups flour; one
teaspoonful soda. mix well, salt and spice to taste, and steam two
hours.

_dressing_--mix one heaping tablespoonful flour and two of sugar;
add to these grated nutmeg. stir and add one-half pint of boiling
water; add to this a small tablespoonful of butter, a little lemon and
vanilla, one teaspoonful vinegar. let it come to a boil, and if too
thick, add more water.


english plum pudding.

from mrs. s. w. mclaughlin, of north dakota, lady manager.

a pound of suet, chopped fine; a pint of sugar; one pound of grated
stale bread; one pound of raisins, two of currants; a glass of
unfermented wine or jelly; two teaspoonfuls of ginger, one of soda;
two nutmegs; half a pint of milk; a little salt. beat well and steam
five hours. serve with rich sauce.


vegetable plum pudding.

from miss mary e. busselle, of new jersey, lady manager.

one-half pound flour; one-half pound chopped suet; one-half pound
currants; one-half pound prunes; one-quarter pound grated raw carrots;
three-quarters pound grated raw potatoes; one-half pound brown sugar;
one large teaspoonful of baking powder; pinch of salt. flavor with a
teaspoonful each of nutmeg, cinnamon and cloves. the moisture from the
raw vegetables makes sufficient wetting.


plum pudding

from mrs. helen c. brayton, of south carolina, vice-president of state
board and lady manager.

one pound seedless raisins; one pound dried currants; one pound stale
bread crumbs; one-half pound finely chopped beef suet; one-fourth
pound shredded citron; eight eggs; one quart milk; one-half cup sugar;
mace or nutmeg; one gill of brandy; one teaspoon salt; eggs well
beaten and put in last; raisins floured before stirring in. boil
gently five hours without stopping. water must be boiling when pudding
is put in and kept boiling till done. eat with liquid wine sauce. pour
alcohol around pudding and set it on fire. a sprig of holly in centre
for christmas.


christmas plum pudding.

from mrs. alice j. whalen, of utah, lady manager.

one pint and a half of grated bread crumbs (soft, not dried), one pint
of chopped suet, one pint of currants, one pint and a half of stoned
raisins, half a cup of citron shaved thin, one scant cup of sugar,
half a teaspoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of grated nutmeg, one
teaspoonful of mace, five eggs, yolks and whites beaten separately,
two even teaspoonfuls of flour made into a thin batter with milk, and
half a glass of brandy; mix in the order given and steam four hours.

_sauce for pudding_--cream one-fourth pound butter, add one-
fourth pound of brown sugar and stir over hot water until liquid, then
add the yolks of two eggs, well beaten; stir until it thickens. just
before serving add a cup of brandy and hot water equal parts.


cherry pudding.

from mrs. louise l. barton, of idaho, alternate lady manager.

one pint of flour, one heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, lump of
butter the size of a hickory nut, one pinch of salt, wet up with milk
to a thick batter as stiff as for gems; add one pint of cherries with
the juice strained off; stir the cherries into the batter; steam in
stem cake dish; butter cake dish, and steam three-quarters of an hour.
when done turn out on plate.

_sauce for same_--one cup of cherry juice, one cup of sugar, one
cup of water, small lump of butter, one tablespoonful of thickening;
when it boils up add two tablespoons of cherry wine and nutmeg to
taste. this pudding is enough for twelve persons.


bread and butter pudding.

from mrs. nancy huston banks, of kentucky, alternate lady
manager-at-large.

butter thin slices of bread and place them in dish; then a layer of
fruit, such as berries (or preserves will do); then another layer of
bread and butter, and so on until the dish is full. then pour beaten
eggs in a quart of milk, say three eggs to the quart, over the
ingredients and bake half an hour.


delicate indian pudding.

from mrs. s. w. mclaughlin, of north dakota, lady manager.

one quart of milk, two heaping tablespoonfuls of indian meal, four of
sugar, one of butter, three eggs, one teaspoonful of salt; boil the
milk in the double boiler; sprinkle the meal into it, stirring all the
while; cook twelve minutes, stirring often. beat together the eggs,
salt, sugar and half a teaspoonful of ginger; stir the butter into the
meal and milk; pour this gradually on the egg mixture. bake slowly one
hour.


baked indian pudding.

prom mrs. mariam d. cooper, of montana, alternate lady manager.

three large tablespoons corn meal. scald one quart sweet milk; stir
meal in while hot; small lump butter, one cup molasses, salt; add one
pint cold milk after putting in pan; bake five hours; eat with a
little butter.


prune roll

from mrs. clark waring, of south carolina, alternate lady manager.

soak two pounds of prunes in cold water over night; drain through a
colander and seed them. make your puff paste; roll it out; place your
prunes on the paste, sprinkling with a little sugar on top; then roll
smoothly. bake in a steady heat and serve hot with hard butter sauce,
or very rich wine sauce.


prune pudding.

from mrs. hattie e. sladden, of oregon, alternate lady manager.

thoroughly wash one pound of prunes; soak over night, stewing in same
water until very soft; sweeten to the taste while cooking. next mash
the fruit, removing the stones, and add half a box of gelatine
(previously dissolved in a little water) and whites of four eggs well
beaten. serve cold with cream.


prune pudding.

from mrs. mary s. mcneal, of oklahoma, alternate lady manager.  to a
large cup of stewed prunes (chopped fine) add a large tablespoon of
sugar and a pinch of cream of tartar; then the well beaten whites of
seven eggs. bake about twenty minutes in a shallow pan or dish with a
greased paper in bottom so pudding can be turned out without breaking.
serve cold with whipped cream.


prune pudding.

from mrs. john r. wilson, of south dakota, lady manager.

one cup of prunes, one cup of raisins, one cup suet, one cup molasses,
one cup bread crumbs, one-half cup milk, one and one-half cup flour,
one teaspoon soda, one teaspoon each of cloves and cinnamon, one-half
nutmeg. steam three hours.


bread pudding.

from mrs. kate canthon mcdaniel, of texas, alternate lady manager.

place in a buttered tin alternate layers of buttered bread and raisins
or chopped apples. take the yolks of four eggs and two cups of sugar,
beat until light; add a pint of sweet milk; flavor to suit taste; pour
over the bread and bake in a moderate oven. when done, beat the whites
to a stiff froth, add a little sugar, flavor, heap on the pudding and
return to the oven until a light brown.


chocolate pudding.

from miss mary b. hancock, of iowa, treasurer state board and
alternate lady manager.

one quart milk, heated in double kettle; six tablespoons of grated
chocolate; four yolks of eggs, beaten well and mixed with eight
tablespoons of sugar; two tablespoons, or a little more, of
cornstarch, dissolved in a little cold milk. let these ingredients
just come to a boil and flavor with vanilla, place in pudding dish and
cover on top with the stiff froth of four whites of eggs, sweetened
with three large teaspoons of sugar, into which stick twenty-four
separated blanched almonds. to be eaten with sweetened cream flavored
with a little vanilla.


danish pudding.

from mary b. hancock,

ten eggs; one quart of cream; eight tablespoonfuls of sugar; one
dessertspoon of vanilla. beat the eggs and sugar together, heat the
cream and pour over it.

_caramel_--two and one-half cups of brown sugar, cooked until
very brown; then add one cup of cold water and pour into the pudding
and bake.


delicious pudding.

from mrs. elizabeth c. langworthy, of nebraska, lady manager.

to two cups of boiling milk add four tablespoons of floor and two of
butter, beaten together. when thickened, add four tablespoons sugar
and yolks of eight eggs. when quite cold add whites of eggs, well
beaten, and bake in moderate oven twenty minutes. serve hot with sauce
made of one-half cup of butter, beaten to a cream, one cup of sugar,
added gradually; white of egg, beaten stiff. add lemon or vanilla to
taste.


suet pudding.

from mrs. helen m. barker, of south dakota, lady manager.

one cup chopped suet; one cup molasses (new orleans); one cup chopped
raisins; one cup sweet milk; three cups sifted flour; one teaspoon
soda dissolved in milk; spices to taste. steam three hours.

serve with sauce made as follows: one cup of sugar; one-half cup of
butter; one egg--cream well. cook by pouring boiling water and
stirring constantly.


suet pudding.

from mrs. leander stone, of chicago, lady manager.

_the following recipe for suet pudding has been unfailing in my
family for forty years past. sincerely yours,

one cup molasses; one cup suet, chopped fine; one cup sweet milk; one
cup fruit; one teaspoon salt; a piece of soda size of a pea; flour to
make it as stiff as pound cake. steam three hours.


queen pudding.

prom mrs. l. c. gillespie, of tennessee, lady manager.

one quart of sweet milk; one pint of grated bread crumbs; one teacup
of white sugar; four eggs, and butter the size of hen's egg. beat
yolks of eggs with the sugar until very light; cream butter and add to
eggs and sugar; then stir in bread crumbs and after these ingredients
are well mixed, pour in the milk, stirring all thoroughly. bake in
porcelain pan or granite iron, under a good fire with a well heated
oven. twenty minutes is sufficient time to bake it. you do not want it
baked until it is stiff and hard, but it must quake as you lift it
from the oven. you now cover the top of the pudding, first with a half
glass of jelly cut in very thin slices, and over this you put the
whites of the four eggs, beaten to a stiff froth, to which you add and
beat in two tablespoonfuls of sugar. put the pudding again into the
stove, this time in the top, where the whites of the eggs may brown
quickly. serve cold, with cream whipped and flavored with vanilla.
this, properly baked, is a delicate, delicious pudding.


steam pudding.

from mrs. john s. briggs, of nebraska, lady manager.

one quart flour, one coffeecup chopped raisins or currants, one teacup
chopped suet, one teacup half filled with molasses, finish with brown
sugar, one teaspoon soda, two teacupfuls sweet milk, a little salt,
mix and steam three hours.

_steam pudding sauce_--three-quarters of a cup of butter, one and
a half cups of sugar, one egg, juice and grated rind of a lemon all
well beaten together. just before serving, pour on the beaten mixture
one pint of boiling water.


steam pudding.

from mrs. clara l, mcadow, of montana, lady manager.

four cups flour, four spoons baking powder, one-half can cherries,
little salt, stir a stiff batter; steam one and a half hours.


baked huckleberry pudding.

from mrs. nellie b. plumer, of pennsylvania, alternate lady manager.

two cups light brown sugar, one cup butter and lard mixed, one cup
sour milk, four eggs, one teaspoonful of soda, one quart
huckleberries. make the dough as thick as jelly cake; bake three-
quarters of an hour in a moderate oven. use wine or butter sauce as
preferred.


minnie's lemon pudding.

from mrs. h. j. peto, of arizona, alternate lady manager.

two lemons, two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, one and one-half cup
granulated sugar, three eggs. grate rind of one lemon; squeeze juice
and pulp of two lemons; beat yolks of the eggs with a portion of the
sugar, then add balance of sugar and the grated rind and lemon juice;
mix the cornstarch with a little water; add boiling water, stirring
constantly until thick and clear; add the ingredients previously mixed
and stir until thoroughly incorporated with the starch; pour into a
pudding dish, cool a little, then set into the oven for a few minutes
to brown; beat the whites of the eggs stiff; add a little powdered
sugar and put over top of pudding; brown slightly. may be served warm,
but is delicious if set on ice until thoroughly cold.


cup pudding

from mrs. marie j. gaston, of south dakota, alternate lady manager.

one-half cup of sugar, one cup flour, one-half cup cold water, one
egg, one tablespoonful of butter, two level teaspoonfuls baking
powder, a pinch of salt. grease cups and put in the bottom of the cups
a little fruit, such as dried currants, cherries, etc., or a little
preserves; pour in the batter, filling the cups a little more than
half full; set them in a steamer and steam forty minutes. this will
make five cups. served with the following sauce:

_pudding sauce_--six tablespoonfuls pulverized sugar, two
tablespoons of butter, one egg; beat altogether with an egg beater;
flavor with vanilla. when ready to serve, add one cup of boiling
water.


italian roll

from mrs. f. h. daniell, of new hampshire, alternate lady manager.

mix together one-half pound fine flour and from four to five ounces of
sifted sugar; put in a sauce pan and bring to the boiling point, one-
half pint of new milk and one-quarter pound fresh butter; stir in
gradually the flour and sugar; beat well four fresh eggs, add them
with the grated rind of a lemon, stirring until the mixture is thick
like dough. put it on a pasteboard and when cold roll to the desired
thickness, about one-quarter of an inch thick; lay any kind of jam
over the paste, roll it into a bolster-like form and bake. serve cold,
whole, or in slices nearly an inch thick. time twenty to twenty-five
minutes to bake.


chaperone pudding.

from mrs. annie l. y. orff, of missouri, alternate lady manager.

one pint nice, fine bread crumbs to one quart of milk; one cup sugar;
yolks of four eggs beaten light; grated rind of one lemon; butter size
of an egg; bake until done, but not watery. whip the whites of four
eggs beaten stiff; beat in a teacup of sugar; then add the juice of
one lemon; pour over pudding; eat cold.


apple pudding.

from mrs. ida l. turner, of texas, lady manager.

pare and core ten good sized apples. stew them to a pulp, with sugar
enough to sweeten; thickly butter the sides and bottom of an earthen
baking dish and press all around them crumbs from the inside of a loaf
of bread, having them nearly an inch thick. mix with the apples a
tablespoonful of butter and one egg, beaten; put the apples into the
dish without disturbing the crumbs; over the surface put a layer of
crumbs, dotted with bits of butter, and bake the pudding until brown;
turn a platter over the pudding dish, quickly turn both upside down so
the pudding will slip out on platter. dust with powdered sugar and
serve hot.


baked apple dumpling.

from mrs. schuyler. colfax, of indiana, alternate lady manager-at-
large.

pare and core tart apples; fill the centers with sugar, butter and a
small pinch of cinnamon or a little grated nutmeg. make a rich, light
pie crust, roll, cut in squares, fold a square around each apple, put
them into a buttered pan. now cream together half a cup of butter and
a cup of sugar, and put over the whole, when they are ready for the
oven, pour a little cold water into the pan, and bake slowly an hour
and a half or two hours.


foam sauce.

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

three teacupfuls of pulverized sugar; one of butter; three
tablespoonfuls of flour; one teacupful of boiling water. beat butter,
sugar and flour together thoroughly; stir into the boiling water; let
it boil up and flavor with vanilla, and serve immediately.




cake


sponge cake.

from mrs. isabella beecher hooker, of connecticut, lady manager.

_the recipe i send for sponge cake was one constantly in use twenty-
five years ago, when this picture was taken, and so might well be used
in connection with that recipe, which is the only one in which i fell
a personal interest._

_it gives me pleasure to oblige you, and i am cordially yours for
womankind, also for mankind._

ten eggs; one-half pound flour; one pound pulverized sugar; one lemon;
small teaspoon salt. beat yolks separately and very thoroughly; add
sugar, salt, lemon juice and grated peel, and beat again. beat whites
to stiffness and add to the yolks, beating well together. then cut the
flour in slowly with large knife and _avoid beating_ after this.
bake in two deep, long, narrow tins, in rather slow oven, but hot on
the bottom. the secret of success is in cutting in the flour and the
baking. but few people will believe this and cannot reach my standard.
i have made this cake for forty years with uniform success.


sponge cake.

from mrs. martha a. griggs, of washington, alternate lady manager.

six eggs; two cups of sugar. beat twenty minutes, stir in lightly two
cups of flour and a little salt. flavor to taste.


sponge cake.

from mrs. marie j. gaston, of south dakota, alternate lady manager.

four eggs; two cups of sifted floor; two cups of granulated sugar; one
cup of boiling water; two level teaspoonfuls of baking powder. beat
the eggs very light, yolks and whites together; add the sugar, then
one cup of flour, little by little; put baking powder in the other cup
of flour and add in the same way; then pour in the cup of boiling
water, a little at a time, stirring constantly. flavor with vanilla.
bake in dripping pan twenty-five minutes.


north dakota sponge cake.

from mrs. alice vineyard brown, of north dakota, alternate lady
manager.

one cup of sugar, one cup of flour, four eggs. beat yolks of eggs to a
light creamy mixture, pour over the sugar and beat two minutes; add
whites beaten to a foam, and stir hard for two minutes; now add one
cup of flour which has been sifted three times, and to which was added
a pinch of salt; stir _very lightly_, usually four whisks of the
spoon is sufficient; now pour into a shallow pan; let stand one
minute; raise the pan several inches from the table and let it drop
suddenly, striking flat on the bottom; this will cause air bubbles to
break and make the cake fine grained; put into a very moderate oven
and in five minutes heat quickly; twelve to fifteen minutes will
suffice. have ready a lemon frosting, and the result will be a most
beautiful cake, fit to grace any occasion.


chaperone sponge cake.

from mrs. annie l. y. orff, of missouri, alternate lady manager.

mix one and one-half cups pulverized sugar; one teacup flour; a little
salt; one teaspoon baking powder; beat the whites of eleven eggs to a
stiff froth; flavor with lemon or vanilla; mix all together and bake.
use yolks for custard or gold cake.


new england raised loaf cake.

from miss frances s. ives, of connecticut, lady manager.

one pound of sugar, two pounds of flour, three eggs, one-fourth pound
citron, one pound of butter, one pint of milk, one pound of raisins,
one good-sized wine glass rum or brandy, one-half nutmeg, one cup
yeast, cream one-half butter and sugar; mix this with all the flour,
yeast and milk; let this mixture stand in a warm place until quite
light, then add the remaining half of butter and sugar creamed and the
eggs beaten very light; then let the mixture stand in a warm place
until again very light; then add rum, raisins, citron and nutmegs then
put into pans for baking, letting it remain out of oven until very
light again. this makes three loaves. bake about one hour.


french loaf cake.

from mrs. martha. a. griggs, of washington, alternate lady manager.

two and one-half cups sugar, one cup butter, one cup milk, four cups
flour, three eggs, one wine glass sherry; one wine glass brandy, one-
half teaspoon soda, one pound raisins (stoned), one-half pound
citron, one teaspoon cloves, two teaspoons cinnamon, one nutmeg; bake
one hour.


grandmother's bread cake.

from mrs. mary c. bell, of florida, lady manager.

three cups sugar, one cup butter, three eggs, one bowlful stoned
raisins, floured, one teaspoonful allspice, ground, one teaspoonful
cloves, ground, one tablespoonful cinnamon, ground. when well mixed
add three cups of bread sponge before the flour is added for kneading;
stir well and then add flour until as stiff as can be easily stirred;
half fill two medium-sized pans and stand in a warm place till light
and bake in a moderate oven.


old virginia bread cake.

from mrs. katherine s. g. paul, of virginia, lady manager.

one and one-half pounds flour; one pound white sugar; ten ounces of
butter; one-half teacup sweet milk; one-half teacup good yeast; four
eggs; one cup of currants and seed-less raisins, chopped and mixed
together; one teaspoonful each mace and cinnamon and a little
allspice; work butter and sugar together; sift flour into a bowl; stir
in milk and yeast with one-half the creamed butter and sugar; beat
hard and long until very light; set to rise in a moderately warm place
over night. in the morning, if it be well risen, work in the remainder
of the butter and sugar and the eggs; dredge the fruit with flour and
beat in a little at a time with the spice; beat for fully five
minutes; divide and put into two pans to rise. the second rising
generally requires about three hours. when the dough is very light
bake in a moderate oven. when carefully made this cake is very fine.


bread cake.

from mrs. clara l. mcadow. of montana, lady manager.

three cups of very light dough, three cups sugar, one cup butter,
three eggs, one nutmeg, one teaspoonful cinnamon, raisins, a teaspoon
of salaratus dissolved in a little hot water.


corn starch cake.

one cup butter, two cups sugar, one teaspoon cream tartar, one-half
teaspoon soda, two cups flour, one cup corn starch, four eggs, one cup
milk.


exposition orange cake.

from mrs. s. e. verdenal, of new york, lady manager-at-large.

two cups sugar, two cups of sifted flour, one-half cup of water, two
teaspoonfuls yeast powder mixed with the flour, the yolks of five eggs
and the whites of three beaten separately, the grating and juice of
one orange; bake in layers like jelly cake.

_filling_--one cup sugar, grating and juice one orange, whites of
two eggs beaten into a froth.


orange cake.

from mrs. frances welles shepard, of chicago, lady manager.

_i send you with pleasure the enclosed recipe for orange cake. i
have used it for twenty-five years and know it to be excellent.
wishing you all success in your kind efforts. believe me, yours very
truly,_

one coffeecup sugar, one-half coffeecup butter, two coffeecups flour,
one-half coffeecup milk, yolks of four eggs, whites of two eggs, two
teaspoons of baking powder; bake in four layer tins. for the filling,
grate the yellow part of the rind of two oranges and mix it with the
juice and one coffeecup of powdered sugar; spread, this mixture
between the cakes; frost the cake, using the two remaining whites of
eggs beaten thoroughly, adding two small cups of powdered sugar.


angel food.

from mrs. mary c. harrison, of wyoming, lady manager.

the whites of fifteen eggs; one and one-half cups of powdered sugar;
one cup of flour; one teaspoon of cream of tartar; sift sugar three
times; mix cream of tartar with flour, sift seven times; beat eggs
stiff, add sugar gradually, beating all the time with egg beater; take
out; stir the flour quickly with wooden spoon; do not grease or line
the tin; bake slowly and steadily; turn out on platter for frosting.


angel cake.

from mrs. daniel hall, of new hampshire, lady manager.

the whites of eleven eggs beaten to a stiff froth; add one and one-
half cups of pulverized sugar and one teaspoonful of vanilla extract;
take one even cup of flour and one teaspoonful cream of tartar and
sift with flour four times; beat lightly but thoroughly; bake fifty
minutes in an ungreased pan; cut out when cold.


sunshine cake.

yolks of eleven eggs, two cups of sugar, one cup of butter, one cup of
milk, one teaspoonful cream tartar, one-half teaspoonful of soda,
three cups of sifted flour, one teaspoonful of vanilla.


election cake. (one hundred years old.)

from mrs. helen c. brayton, of south carolina, vice-president state
board and lady manager.

four pounds flour; two pounds butter; two and one-half pounds sugar;
two and one-half pounds raisins; one-half pound citron; one-half ounce
mace; tumbler of brandy; one pint yeast; one and one-half pint milk;
eight eggs. add to the yeast one pint of milk; then beat in smoothly
three pints of flour. take all the flour and half the sugar and butter
(when beaten to a cream); add the milk and yeast and make a dough a
little softer than bread. when raised very light, add remainder of
ingredients and let it rise again. when very light put into pans. bake
in moderate oven one hour.


connecticut election cake.

from mrs. virginia t, smith, of connecticut, alternate lady manager.

two pounds best pastry flour; one pound shortening (half butter and
half lard); one pound and two ounces sugar; whites of two eggs; one
nutmeg; half a pound of raisins (loose muscatels); quarter teaspoon of
mace; one tablespoon of lemon juice; one tablespoon extract of orange;
half teaspoon salt; half a compressed yeast cake, and two ounces of
citron. work the shortening and sugar to a cream; then rub half of it
into the flour; dissolve the yeast cake in a little warm water; mix
the flour and yeast with sufficient milk (about one and a half pints
that has been scalded and cooled) to make a batter about like graham
bread; work with the hands for at least twenty minutes; make at night
and set in a moderately warm room to rise; in the morning add the
remainder of the shortening and sugar; work again with the hands, as
when first made, for fifteen or twenty minutes, and set to rise again.
seed and cut the raisins, grate the nutmeg and sprinkle that and the
mace over the raisins. when the cake is light, add first the lemon
juice, then extract of orange and whites of eggs, well beaten; stir in
fruit well floured: dip into three pans, buttered and lined with
paper. let it stand until it begins to rise--it will come up very
quickly in the oven if it has been twice well raised. have oven hot
enough to check the rising after it has reached the top of the pans;
after it begins to brown, check the fire and let it bake rather slowly
the remainder of the time. whole time, one hour and a quarter.


almond cream cake.

from mrs. flora beall ginty, of wisconsin, seventh vice-president
board of lady managers.

two cupfuls of pulverized sugar; one-quarter cupful of butter; one
cupful of sweet milk; three cupfuls of flour; two and a half
teaspoonfuls of baking powder; whites of four eggs, beaten very light;
one-half teaspoonful of vanilla. bake in four layers. whip one cupful
of sweet cream to a froth, stirring gradually into it half a cupful of
pulverized sugar, a few drops of vanilla, one pound of almonds,
blanched and chopped fine. spread thick between layers; frost top and
sides.


velvet cake.

from mrs. sallie s. cotten, of north carolina, president state board
and alternate lady manager.

one pound sugar; one pound flour; one-half pound butter; four eggs;
one teacup of cold water; one teaspoonful cream of tartar; one-half
teaspoonful soda. put yolks and whites of eggs in separate vessels;
dissolve soda in the water, sift the cream tartar in the flour. beat
the sugar and butter to a white cream; add the flour and water,
stirring well. next add the whites and lastly the yolks, both well
beaten. flavor with lemon and beat all together for three minutes.
bake an hour. excellent also for a layer cake, with any filling.


caramel cake.

from mrs. james r. doolittle, jr., of chicago, lady manager.

one even cup butter; two even cups sugar; three even cups flour;
whites of eight eggs; two even teaspoonfuls baking powder; one
teaspoonful vanilla; one cup milk. stir butter and sugar to a cream,
add milk slowly, then flour in which the baking powder has been mixed,
and lastly the well beaten whites of eggs and vanilla. bake in three
layers and to prevent sticking use white paper cut the size of the tin
and well greased with lard.

_caramel filling_--two cups of brown sugar; one cup of cream or
milk; three tablespoonfuls butter; one teaspoonful vanilla. boil until
the mixture will hold together in water; then spread between the
layers and on the outside. if it curdles when boiling, strain through
coarse sieve and put on the stove again. when done, put in vanilla.


a caramel cake.

from mrs. france luse albright, of new mexico, lady manager.

to be baked in layers. four eggs; three-fourths of a cup of butter;
one-half cup of milk; three and one-half cups of flour; two
teaspoonfuls of baking powder; flavor to suit taste.

_filling_--two cups of brown sugar; one cup of rich cream; size
of a walnut of butter; boil one-half hour well stirred; spread between
the layers of the cake while hot.

_chocolate filling_--six tablespoonfuls of grated chocolate; one
and one-half cups of pulverized sugar; two tablespoonfuls of cream;
put the chocolate in the pan with the cream and one-half the sugar and
let dissolve; add the remainder of the sugar to the whites of two eggs
well beaten; flavor with vanilla for four layers of cake.


roll jelly cake.

from mrs. flora beall ginty, of wisconsin, seventh vice-president
board of lady managers.

five eggs, two cupfuls of sugar, two of flour, one-half cupful of
milk, two teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar, one of soda; bake in square
tins, spread with jelly and roll while warm. lemon jelly is very nice.
this recipe makes four rolls.


chocolate cake.

from mrs. ralph trautmann, of new york city, first vice-president
board of lady managers.

have ready one-half pound sweet chocolate grated; one-fourth pound
chopped citron; one-fourth pound almonds, blanched and chopped; five
soda crackers, browned and rolled very fine; wineglass of brandy and
the juice and grated rind of two lemons; separate the yolks of eggs
from the whites; beat yolks well, mix with other ingredients and
lastly add the whites whipped to a stiff froth; bake two hours in a
slow oven; cover with frosting and ornament with candied fruit.


georgie's cake.

from mrs. clark waring, of south carolina, alternate lady manager.

three teaspoonfuls of soda; one cup butter; one cup molasses; two cups
brown sugar; two cups sour milk; four eggs; four and one-half cups
flour; one tablespoonful mixed spices; two pounds dates, weeded and
chopped fine; rub the butter and sugar to a cream, add the molasses,
then the sour milk, break one egg in at a time and beat well; sift the
soda in the flour and add, saving a little to dust the dates; add the
spices and last of all add the dates; bake slowly like a fruit cake.


chess cake.

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

four eggs beaten separately and added to one cup of butter and one cup
of sugar thoroughly creamed, flavor with nutmeg; line small patty pans
with puff paste; place in the bottom a teaspoonful of jelly and pour
over it a tablespoonful of the egg, butter and sugar mixture; bake in
a rather slow oven. this is a nice tart for lunch or picnics as it
keeps well and never gets dry.


fruit cake.

from mrs. a. k. delaney, of alaska, lady manager.

one and one-half pound of flour; one and one-half pound of sugar; one
and one-fourth pound of butter; two pounds of raisins; two pounds of
currants; three-fourths pound candied lemon, four nutmegs; one
teaspoonful soda; one teaspoonful cinnamon; one teaspoonful cloves;
one cup brandy or wine; bake slowly.


english fruit cake.

from mrs. phoebe m. hartpence, of ohio, chairman commissioners on
woman's work, lady manager.

four cups brown sugar; two cups butter; twelve eggs; one lemon,
grated; two nutmegs, grated; one-half tablespoonful cloves; one
tablespoonful cinnamon; one tablespoonful allspice; one-half pint
cream; one cup pure brandy; eight cups flour, sifted; one-half cup
molasses; two and one-half pounds raisins, seeded, whole; two and one-
half pounds currants; six teaspoonfuls baking powder; one level
teaspoonful soda. the success of this cake depends very largely upon
having every ingredient prepared before commencing to use them. begin
by thoroughly mixing sugar and butter, then yolks of eggs well beaten;
put the soda into the molasses and cream, add this to the above; next
add spices and stir up thoroughly; now add the brandy (good whisky
will do); take a portion of the flour and thoroughly flour the fruit
with it; put the baking powder in the flour that remains and sift part
of it into the mixture; now add the beaten whites of eggs and stir
gently; stir in the fruit, bake from two to two and one-half hours in
a moderate oven.


fruit cake.

from mrs. m. p. h. breson, of oklahoma, lady manager.

yolks of one dozen eggs, one pound dried currants, one pound seeded
raisins, one pound butter, one-half pound citron, one pound brown
sugar, one cup sorghum molasses, one pound blanched almonds, one-half
pound brazil nuts, one-half cup sour milk, two teaspoonfuls soda, six
cups flour, with cinnamon, allspice and cloves. the flour should be
browned in slow oven in order to make the cake look dark and rich.
this recipe will make a very large cake, the same to be baked for
three hours in slow oven.


fruit cake.

from mrs. hester a. hanback, of kansas, lady manager.

one pound butter, one pound brown sugar, one pound flour, twelve eggs,
four pounds currants, four pounds raisins, one pound citron, two
pounds figs, two pounds blanched almonds, two oranges, one
tablespoonful cinnamon, one tablespoonful allspice, one-half
tablespoonful mace, one-half tablespoonful cloves, one nutmeg, one
lemon peel (chopped fine), one gill wine, one gill brandy; chop orange
peel and pulp (removing seeds), then work in all the sugar you can
(this is extra sugar), slice the almonds thin, also citron, chop figs
quite fine. fruit should he weighed after seeding and currants washed.
beat whites and yolks of eggs separately and roll fruit in flour
before putting together. this makes a ten quart pan full. one
tablespoonful baking powder; five pounds raisins, four pounds seeded;
four and one-fourth pounds currants, four pounds washed; six pounds
almonds, two pounds blanched.


sally white cake.

from mrs. florence h. kidder, of north carolina, lady manager.

_the "sally white cake" is delicious, and if i am not mistaken, has
yet only a local fame, but it should have a national one. wishing you
every success in your undertaking, i am, very sincerely yours,_

one pound of butter, three pounds of citron, one and one-fourth pound
of sugar, one pound of flour, fifteen eggs, two small cocoanuts
grated, one and one-half pound of almonds, blanched and pounded (weigh
after blanching), one nutmeg, one tablespoonful of mace, one wineglass
of best brandy, one of madeira or sherry, bake slowly as a fruit cake
and frost.


delicate cake.

from mrs. john a. logan, of district of columbia, lady manager.

four ounces butter, fourteen ounces sugar, whites of six eggs, twelve
ounces of flour, two teaspoons of baking powder, one cup of milk. rub
the butter and sugar together until they form a cream, stir the baking
powder through the flour, then add it, a cupful at a time, to the
butter and sugar, then stir in the milk, putting in the whites of the
eggs after being beaten to a froth, a large spoonful at a time. bake
in a brisk oven.


delicate cake.

from mrs. harriet t. upton, of ohio, alternate lady manager.

use the same size cup for all ingredients. two cups (coffee) sugar,
one-half cup butter, stir to a cream; whites of eight eggs beaten
stiff, three-fourths cup sweet milk, two and one-half cups flour, two
teaspoons baking powder stirred into flour; put whites of eggs in last
and stir gently.


white cake.

from mrs. governor john m. stone, of mississippi, lady manager.

whites of twelve eggs, five teacups flour, three teacups sugar, one
teacup sweet milk, one full cup butter, two teaspoonfuls yeast powder.


walnut cake.

from mrs. frances c. holley, of north dakota, alternate lady manager.

three cups of sugar; one cup of butter; four cups of flour; one and
one-half cup of sweet milk; three cups of walnut or butternut meats;
whites of eight eggs. cream the butter and sugar; sift two teaspoons
of cream tartar into the flour, into which stir the meats. dissolve
one teaspoon of soda in the milk. salt and extract as you like, adding
the thoroughly-whipped whites the last thing before putting into the
oven. half of this rule can he used.


nut cake.

from miss josephine shakspeare, of louisiana, lady manager.

four tablespoons of flour; four tablespoons of brown sugar; one
tablespoon of butter; one egg; one teacup of chopped nuts; a pinch of
salt and black pepper. grease and heat a long biscuit pan, mix all
ingredients well and spread thinly on heated pan. bakes in a few
moments. when done and while warm, run a knife through center of pan
lengthwise, then crosswise in strips. turn pan over, and when cool
cakes should be quite crisp. very old french recipe.


nut cake.

from mrs. minna g. hooker, of vermont, alternate lady manager.

one-half cup butter; two cups sugar; one cup milk; three cups flour;
four eggs; cue pint nut meats; two teaspoons baking powder. cream
butter and sugar. add eggs well whipped, milk, flour with baking
powder, and nut meats chopped fine. bake in loaf. english walnuts
best.


nut cake.

from mrs. alice houghton, of washington, lady manager.

one and one-half cup sugar; one-half cup butter; whites of six eggs,
beaten stiff; one-half cup milk; one and two-thirds cup flour; one-
third cup corn starch; one teaspoon baking powder; one and one-half
pound english walnuts, chopped fine and floured. bake slowly in
moderate oven.


pecan cake.

from mrs. russell. b. harrison, of montana, vice-president-at-large.

one cup of butter; two and a half cups of flour; two cups of sugar;
one-half cup of sweet milk; whites of eight eggs; two teaspoonfuls
baking powder. beat together butter and sugar; add a little of the
beaten egg; then put in a cup of flour, then some milk, then again
flour and milk; put all the milk in with the second cup of flour; then
add the rest of the egg.

_icing to fill and put over top of pecan cake_--whites of six
eggs, beaten stiff with powdered sugar; one small can of grated
pineapple and two cups of pecans, chopped fine. the nuts should soak
awhile in the pineapple before mixing them into the egg and sugar. put
whole pecan kernels over the top of the cake while the icing is still
soft.

cake made with cream.

from mrs. sarah h. bixby, of maine, alternate lady manager.

break two eggs in a cup and fill with cream, and one cup sugar, one
teaspoonful cream tartar, one-half teaspoonful soda and one and one-
half cup of flour, with a little salt.

cream frosting.

from mrs. mary payton, of oregon, lady manager.

one cup of sweet thick cream, sweetened and flavored with vanilla. cut
a loaf of cake in two and spread the frosting between and on top. this
tastes like charlotte russe.


almond icing.

from mrs. lana a. bates, of nebraska, alternate lady manager.

whites of four eggs; one pound of sweet almonds; one pound powdered
sugar; a little rose water. blanch the almonds by pouring boiling
water over them and stripping off the skins. when dry, pound them to a
paste, a few at a time, in a mortar, moistening with rose water as you
go on. when beaten fine and smooth, beat gradually into icing. put on
the cake very thick and when nearly dry cover with plain icing.


soft gingerbread.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

one teacup sweet milk, one teacup brown sugar, one teacup butter or
mixed butter and lard, one teacup molasses, one tablespoonful ginger,
one tablespoonful cinnamon, four cups flour, two eggs, one pound of
raisins, well floured before being put in, two teaspoonfuls baking
powder.


columbian ginger cake.

from mrs. s. e. verdenal, of new york, lady manager-at-large.

one cup molasses, one cup sugar, one-half cup water, one-half cup
lard, one teaspoonful soda, season with ginger or cinnamon, put flour
in until stiff enough to roll out thin and cut into small cakes.


gingerbread

from mrs. sam. s. fifield, of wisconsin, alternate lady manager.

one-half cup of molasses, one-half cup of sugar, one-half cup of
butter, one-half cup of sour milk, one and one-half cup of flour, two
small eggs, one-half teaspoon of soda, teaspoonful of cinnamon,
ginger, and one-half teaspoon of cloves, a little nutmeg.


soft gingerbread.

from mrs. mary r. kinder, of delaware, lady manager.

one cupful of molasses, one of butter, one of sugar, one of sour
cream, one tablespoonful of ginger, three eggs, one dessertspoonful of
soda, ground spice according to taste, and one quart of sifted flour.
mix the butter and sugar to a cream, then add the other ingredients.


loaf ginger cake.

from mrs. a. k. delaney, of alaska, lady manager.

two eggs, one-half cup molasses, two-thirds cup sugar, half cup lard
or butter, one-half cup milk, three cups flour, one tablespoon ginger,
one teaspoonful cinnamon, one-half tablespoonful soda dissolved in
boiling water, stir in quickly and put in the oven at once.




cookies


hermits or fruit cookies.

from mrs. susan g. cooke, of tennessee, secretary of the board of lady
managers.

_i take pleasure in sending you the enclosed recipes. i thought if
anyone should send you a recipe for cookies it ought to be myself. i
anticipate spending many pleasant hours in the hereafter trying the
recipes of our well known lady managers. with best wishes, believe me
always, most cordially yours._

three eggs, one and one-half cup sugar, one cup butter, one large cup
of raisins stoned and chopped, one teaspoon soda; one teaspoon cloves,
one teaspoon allspice, one teaspoon cinnamon, flour enough to roll.


cookies.

from miss lily irene jackson, of west virginia, lady manager.

three eggs, two cups of sugar, one cup of butter, one cup of sweet
milk, two teaspoons baking powder mix soft, roll thin, bake in a quick
oven.


"corinita" cookies.

from miss lucia b. perea, of new mexico, alternate lady manager.

one cup sugar, one-fourth cup butter, three eggs well beaten together,
one cup milk, two teaspoonfuls baking powder well sifted in two cups
flour.


cookies.

from mrs. robt. b. mitchell, of kansas, lady manager.

beat to a cream one cup of butter, two and one-half cups of sugar and
the yolks of two eggs. add a cup of sour cream, into which has been
dissolved a small teaspoonful of soda; beat the whites of four eggs to
a stiff froth; add to the butter and sugar; flavor to taste; use as
little flour as possible to make of consistency to roll thin; sprinkle
with sugar; flour the cutter to keep dough from sticking; bake in a
quick oven.


ginger cookies.

from mrs. clara l. mcadow, of montana, lady manager.

two tumblers molasses, one tumbler sweet milk, one tumbler butter, one
tablespoon soda, one tablespoon ginger. well beaten. mix very soft.
roll _thick._ bake in a quick oven.


ginger snaps.

from mrs. sam. s. fifield, of wisconsin, alternate lady manager.

one cup of lard, one cup of molasses, one cup of sugar, one
teaspoonful of ginger, one teaspoonful of soda, dissolved in a little
water. boil the sugar, molasses and lard three minutes, let cool, then
add the other ingredients and flour to make very stiff. bake in a hot
oven.


french jumbles.

from mrs. e. s. thomson, of maryland, lady manager.

one and one-half pounds of flour, one pound of granulated sugar,
three-quarters of a pound of butter, three eggs, one teaspoonful of
baking soda, dissolved in half a cup of milk. season with lemon and
grated nutmeg to taste. roll with your hand in granulated sugar. make
in small rings and bake on tin sheets in a quick oven. the dough
should be soft as it can be handled.


sand tarts.

from miss eloise l. romam, of maryland, alternate lady manager.

to three-quarters of a pound of butter, well creamed, add one pound of
sugar and three eggs, reserving the white of one; stir in one pound of
flour. roll out thin and spread on the white of egg; sprinkle with
cinnamon and sugar, and cut in squares. have a half-pound of blanched
and quartered almonds and place on the squares. bake quickly.


lady fingers.

from mrs. m. d. owings, of washington, lady manager.

mix into a half pound of confectioner's sugar the yolks of six eggs.
work this mixture with a spoon until very light and frothy; then mix
into it the whites of six eggs that have been beaten stiff, adding at
the same time a quarter of a pound of flour, dried and sifted. place
this batter into a meringue bag, and squeeze it through in strips two
and one-half inches long, sprinkle over some fine sugar and bake in a
moderate oven twelve to fifteen minutes.




desserts creams jellies custards


pineapple sponge

from mrs. matilda b. carse, of chicago, lady manager.

soak one-half package gelatine in one-half cup water for two hours; to
a pint and a half can of pineapple add one cup of sugar and one cup of
water; simmer fifteen minutes; add the gelatine and allow to remain
over the fire until the gelatine is all melted; pour into a _tin_
basin and place in ice water; when thoroughly cold and beginning to
thicken add the juice of one lemon and the stiffly beaten whites of
four eggs; beat until it will just pour, then turn into a mould and
set in a cool place to harden. serve next day with whipped cream,
sweetened with powdered sugar and flavored with a few drops of
vanilla.


pineapple souffl.

from mrs. james r. deane, of california, lady manager.

three ounces pineapple, cut in discs; three ounces sifted flour; three
ounces sugar; two ounces butter; one-half pint of milk; yolks of three
eggs; whites of four eggs. melt butter in a stew pan, add the flour
and milk and cook well; add the sugar and pineapple; add the yolks of
eggs, one by one, and stir well; then add the whites of eggs whipped
to a stiff froth; stir these in lightly; pour into a well-greased
souffle tin; steam one hour over water that just simmers, not
boiling. serve with this sauce: reduce one glass pineapple syrup about
one-half; add one ounce cube sugar and one glass sherry; color with
cochineal and pour around the pudding.


peach sponge.

from mrs. joseph c. straughan, of idaho, lady manager.

one pint of canned peaches, one-half package of gelatine, the whites
of five eggs, one scant cupful of sugar, one and a half cupful of
water; soak the gelatine for two hours in half a cupful of the water;
boil the cupful of the water and sugar fifteen minutes, mash the
peaches fine, rub through a sieve and put in the syrup, cook five
minutes, stirring all the time; place the sauce pan in another of
boiling water and add the gelatine; stir for five or eight minutes to
dissolve the gelatine; then place the sauce pan in a dish of ice water
and beat the syrup until it begins to cool; add the whites of the eggs
and beat until the mixture begins to harden; pour into a mould and set
away to harden; serve with cream and sugar.


hamburg cream.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

beat together the juice of two lemons, half pound of sifted sugar,
yolks of five eggs; put on the fire in a double boiler and let it come
to a boil; add quickly the whites of the eggs beaten stiff; stir all
well together; take immediately from the fire and serve cold in
glasses or in large dessert dish.


chocolat mouss.

from miss josephine shakspeare, of louisiana, lady manager

four strips of chocolate; one quart of milk, six eggs, one tablespoon
of corn starch; sweeten to taste, and vanilla flavoring. chocolate
dissolved in a little warm milk to a paste. put milk on to boil and
stir in chocolate gradually. set saucepan where it will cook slowly.
beat eggs well, mix in corn starch and add to milk and chocolate. boil
gently until smooth and thick, stirring until done. pour into glass
dish, or custard cups. to be eaten cold with sweetened whipped cream,
heaped upon it.


chocolat souffl.

from mrs. alice houghton, of washington, lady manager.

one pint milk, two tablespoons corn starch, one cup sugar, one square
grated chocolate, three eggs (yolks). scald the milk and stir in the
corn starch wet in a little cold milk, add sugar to the chocolate and
dissolve in a little boiling water, stir into the milk und when cooked
add the beaten yolks of three eggs. remove from the fire and flavor
with vanilla. when cold pour over the top one cup whipped cream, to
which has been added the beaten whites of three eggs.


chocolat meringue.

from mrs. katharine s. g. paul, of virginia, lady manager.

one teacupful grated chocolate, one pint warm water. boil together.
then add one pint sweet milk and let come to a boil. add two heaping
tablespoonfuls of corn starch, dissolved in none-half cup of milk,
sweeten to taste and when cool flavor with vanilla. beat the whites of
two eggs and a pinch of pulverized sugar to a very light froth, and
pile on top.


bavarian cream.

from mrs. alice j. whalen, of utah territory, lady manager.

one-half box gelatine, one-half cup cold water, one pint cream, one
pint milk, four eggs (yolks), one-half cup sugar, one-half teaspoonful
salt, one teaspoonful vanilla, one tablespoonful wine. soak the
gelatine in cold water till soft. chill and whip the cream till you
have three pints. keep the whipped cream on ice, and boil the
remainder of the cream, adding enough milk to make a pint in all. beat
the yolks of the eggs, and add the sugar and salt. pour the boiling
milk on the eggs, and when well mixed put back in the double boiler
and cook about two minutes, or just enough to scald the egg. stir
constantly, add the soaked gelatine, and strain at once into a pan set
in ice water. when cool, add the vanilla and wine. stir until it
begins to harden, then stir in quickly the whipped cream, and when
nearly stiff enough to drop, pour into moulds wet in cold water.

_chocolate bavarian cream_--melt two sticks of sweetened
chocolate, and stir them into the custard before straining.


gelatine cream.

from miss mary elliott mccandless, of pennsylvania, lady manager.

to a pint of cream add half a cupful of powdered sugar and a
teaspoonful vanilla extract; whip it to a stiff froth; dissolve a
quarter of a box of gelatine in two wine glasses of sherry heated, but
not allowed to boil; let this cool a little, then stir into the cream;
pour the whole in a mould and set it on the ice to stiffen.


nob hill pudding.

from miss lida m. russell, of nevada, lady manager.

for one pint thick cream dissolve four sheets of isinglass in four
tablespoons of hot water; whip cream until thick, sweeten and flavor;
have isinglass warm enough to pour, but not too hot; stir in very fast
and put in mould to cool.


apple charlotte.

from mrs. john a. logan, district of columbia, lady manager.

mix one pint of stewed apples with one cup of sugar; the grilled rind
and juice of one lemon; soak one-third of a box of gelatine in one-
third of a cup of cold water twenty minutes; add one-third of a cup of
boiling water to dissolve the gelatine; when cool add it to the
apples; when beginning to stiffen add the beaten whites of three eggs;
pour into moulds lined with lady fingers; serve with soft custard
poured round the base of the charlotte.


charlotte de russe.

from mrs. charles price, of north carolina, third vice-president board
lady managers.

one pint rich cream; two eggs; one-quarter ounce of gelatine; sherry
wine. whip cream, first sweetening with a cup of pulverized sugar,
adding enough sherry to flavor and the yolk of one egg. whip stiff the
two whites of the eggs. dissolve gelatine in half a cup of milk. line
glass dish with slices of sponge cake or lady fingers. whip all the
ingredients together and pour in dish to congeal.


charlotte russe.

from mrs. marcia louise gould, of illinois, president state board and
lady manager.

whip one quart of rich cream to a stiff froth and drain well on a
sieve. to one scant pint of milk add eggs beaten very light. make very
sweet and flavor with vanilla. cook over hot water till it is a thick
custard. soak one full ounce of cox's gelatine in a _little_ cold
water; warm over hot water. when the custard is _very_ cold, beat
in lightly the gelatine and the whipped cream. line the bottom of your
mould with buttered paper, the sides with sponge cake or lady fingers,
fastened together with the white of an egg. fill with the cream and
put in a cold place, in the summer on the ice. to turn out, dip the
mold for a moment in _hot_ water.


charlotte russe.

from mrs. susan w. ball, of indiana, alternate lady manager.

one-half box gelatine, put to soak in one-half pint of milk for an
hour. take one-half pint of milk and yolks of two eggs and make a
custard, sweeten and flavor to taste; when thick enough, stir in the
gelatine until cool. take one quart rich cream, flavored with wine;
sweeten and whip; two dozen lady fingers, soaked in wine; line a bowl
with them. when the custard is cold, stir the cream in it, continuing
to stir until it begins to harden; then pour into bowl. if the cream
is not very rich, add the whites of two eggs.


charlotte russe.

from mrs. george w. lamar, of georgia, alternate lady manager.

one quart of cream; sweeten and flavor with two wine-glasses of wine
and a half teaspoonful of vanilla. whip with an egg whip until it
becomes very thick. put one-third of a box of gelatine (nelson's
preferred) to soak in one pint of water. when quite soft pour off the
water and dissolve by holding over the fire and stirring carefully;
when tepid pour into the cream. let the mixture congeal partially and
pour into a mould that has been lined with lady fingers or sponge cake
cut into strips. put into a cold place and turn out before serving.


strawberry blanc mange.

from mrs. benedette b, tobin, of texas, president state board and lady
manager.

crush slightly with a silver spoon a quart (measured without their
stalks) of fresh and finely flavored strawberries; strew over them
eight ounces of powdered sugar and let them stand three or four hours,
then turn them onto a fine hair sieve reversed, and rub them through
it. melt over a gentle fire two ounces of best gelatine in a pint of
new milk and sweeten it with four ounces of sugar; strain it through a
fine muslin bag and then mix it with a pint and a quarter of sweet
thick cream; keep stirring until nearly or quite cold, then pour it
gradually on the strawberries, whisking briskly together. last of all
add in small portions the strained juice of a fine large lemon. mould
blanc mange and set in a very cold place for twelve hours or more
before serving. strawberries, one quart; sugar, eight ounces;
gelatine, two ounces; new milk, one pint; sugar, four ounces; cream,
one and one-fourth pint; juice one lemon.


snow pudding.

from mrs. susan g. cooke, of tennessee, secretary of the board of lady
managers.

one-half package gelatine, three eggs, juice of one lemon, one pint of
milk, two cups sugar; soak the gelatine one hour in a teacup cold
water; to this add one pint of boiling water (at the end of hour);
stir until gelatine is thoroughly dissolved; add two-thirds of the
sugar and lemon juice; beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth. when
the gelatine is quite cold, whip into the whites, a spoonful at a
time, for at least one hour; whip steadily, and when all is stiff,
pour into a mould previously wet with cold water; set in a cold place,
when sufficiently moulded turn into a glass dish. make a custard of
the milk, eggs and remainder of the sugar, flavor with vanilla or
bitter almond and pour this around the base of mould before serving.


wine or gelatine jelly

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

to a box of cox or nelson's gelatine, put a pint of cold water, the
juice of three lemons and the rind of one: let it stand one hour, then
add three pints of boiling water, one and one-half pound white sugar,
one tumbler of madeira or sherry wine; stir all the ingredients well
together and through a jelly bag.


fruit jelly

from miss wilhelmine reitz, of indiana, lady manager.

cover one box of gelatine with a half pint of cold water and stand it
aside for thirty minutes, then pour over it one pint of boiling water,
add one pound of sugar, juice of three lemons and two oranges, strain.
moisten a plain mould with cold water, put in the bottom a layer of
white grapes, pour in a little of the gelatine; stand on ice until the
gelatine congeals. now put a layer of candied cherries, then a layer
of sliced bananas, a layer of orange pulp, another layer of bananas,
then a layer of chopped almonds, another layer of grapes and so
continue until the mould is full. pour over this the remaining
quantity of gelatine, which must be perfectly cold but not stiff;
stand away to harden. if you use wine, the gelatine may be flavored
with wine omitting the orange and lemon.


a dainty dessert.

from mrs. solomon thatcher, jr, of illinois, lady manager.

take choice seville oranges, remove carefully about one-third of the
orange, leaving a strip one-half inch wide to form a handle. from this
improvised orange basket carefully scoop all the pulp, leaving only
the empty shell. fill this full of charlotte russe. this makes a
pretty dish.


tamales de dulce.

from seora don manuel chaves, of new mexico.

para hacer tamales de dulce se descojo buen mais bianco y se hace
nistamal. despues se lava muy bien de modo que no le quede nada cal y
se muele en el metate muy remolido. despues se bate la masa en un
cajete bien batida y sepulsa en una puca de agua hasta el ver que esta
bien alsado. cuando la masa se sube sobre el agua ya esta de punto. se
le echa una poca de manteca y asucar y se eus pone adatro una poca de
canela molida y pasas y se enbuelven en ojas de mais, y se amarran y
ya estan listos para ser cosidos con vapor.


a cheap dessert.

from mrs. kate canthon mcdaniel, of texas, lady manager.

beat the whites of four eggs to a stiff froth; place them carefully in
a vessel containing a pint of boiling milk; let them remain until set,
then remove carefully to a plate. beat the four yolks and a cup of
sugar until light; stir in half cup of sweet milk, pour slowly into
the boiling milk, stirring briskly all the while; continue stirring
and let it remain on the fire long enough to thicken, taking care that
it never boils or it will be unfit for use; flavor to suit the taste.
place slices of any cake in dessert plates; pour the custard over
them, put a spoonful of the whites on each piece of cake and a drop of
jelly in the center of the whites.


bananas in jelly.

from mrs. governor richards, of montana, president state board and
lady manager.

make with boiling water one quart of strong lemonade, using only the
juice of the lemons; soak one-half box of gelatine in a small cup of
cold water; stir it into the boiling lemonade and set where it will
cool but not harden. cut three bananas in length-wise halves and lay
them in a mould wet with cold water, cover with one-half the jelly and
put the mould on ice till jelly is set, then slice three more and pour
on remainder of jelly. serve with cream or soft custard.


almond blanc mange.

from mrs. bernadette b. tobin, of texas, president state board and
lady manager.

one quart of milk, one ounce of gelatine, three ounces almonds
blanched and pounded in a mortar with one tablespoon of rose water
added to prevent oiling; three-fourths cup sugar. heat the milk to
boiling, having previously soaked the gelatine in a cup of it for an
hour, add gelatine when the milk is scalding hot, add the pounded
almond paste and stir all together ten minutes before putting in the
sugar. when the gelatine has dissolved remove the blanc mange from the
vessel of boiling water in which you have cooked it, and strain
through a thin muslin bag, pressing it well to get flavor of almonds--
there should be three or four bitter ones among them. wet a mould with
cold water, put in the blanc mange and set in a cold place until firm.


floating island.

from mrs. rosine ryan, of texas, lady manager-at-large.

break six eggs into a bowl, separating the whites from four with the
yolks and whites of two; make a boiled custard, say a quart of milk,
six tablespoonfuls of sugar, a flavoring of vanilla, peach or sherry
wine. beat the whites to a stiff froth, sweetening and flavoring them
a little also. wet a large spoon, turn it around in the beaten eggs,
take out a piece of oblong shape, and poach it in boiling milk. when
the custard is cold, pour it into a glass dish and place the poached
whites on top.


boiled custard.

from mrs. charles j. mcclung, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

let one quart of milk come to a boil with a piece of stick cinnamon in
it. beat six eggs (leaving out the whites of three for the float) and
one half pint of sugar very light and pour the boiling milk into them.
wash your kettle and return all to the stove and boil until as thick
as cream (be sure and do not boil until curdled), then act aside to
cool. beat the whites of three eggs with three tablespoonfuls of
sugar, to which you add a little acid jelly as you beat; beat until
perfectly smooth and put on the top of your custard in spoonfuls.


snow balls.

from mrs. nancy huston banks, of kentucky, alternate lady
manager-at-large.

one cup white sugar, one cup thick cream, whites of five eggs, two
teaspoonfuls baking powder, flour to make a stiff batter; bake in
small custard cups.


lemon custard.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

one lemon (juice and grated rind), one cup sugar, yolks of two eggs,
one teaspoonful butter, one-half cup water, two teaspoonfuls
cornstarch, boil water and stir in above mixture.

_icing for top_--whites of two eggs, two tablespoonfuls of
pulverized sugar.




ice cream


fruit cream.

from mrs. h. f. brown, of minnesota, lady manager.

one quart of fruit (after being put through colander); one cup of cold
water--very sweet. add the whites of three eggs (unbeaten). put in a
freezer and freeze as ice cream, stirring continually.


caramel ice cream.

from mrs. lily rosecrans toole, of montana, lady manager.

take one pint of brown sugar and _burn_ it; then add water,
making a dark brown fluid. this ought to make enough to flavor three
pints of cream. have the cream very rich, more so than for ordinary
ice cream. then color the cream with the caramel until it is a good
shade of brown--darker than coffee color. for this you must have your
caramel very black, as it is the quality and not the quantity of
caramel that will give the proper flavor; sweeten to taste.


tutti frutti ice cream.

from mrs. j. montgomery smith, of wisconsin, alternate lady manager.

make one quart rich vanilla ice cream, and when partly frozen, add one
pound of candied fruit, either cherries, currants or citron.


vanilla ice cream.

from mrs. mary c. harrison, of wyoming, lady manager.

three quarts sweet cream; one quart powdered sugar; one pint sweet
milk (dissolve sugar in milk); two tablespoons extract vanilla. pack
with equal quantities of cracked ice and rock salt. turn slowly and
steadily.


maraschino ice cream.

from miss mary elliott mccandless, of pennsylvania, lady manager.

a simple rule for maraschino ice cream calls for one quart of cream, a
large cup of granulated sugar, six egg yolks, a cup of milk, and a
tablespoonful of gelatine, which has been soaked for two hours in four
tablespoonfuls of cold water. let the milk come to a boil and pour it
slowly over the eggs, beat them all the while to prevent their
curdling. then add the gelatine and finally the sugar. beat the whole
well, strain it into the cream und add four tablespoonfuls of
maraschino. pack the cream in a freezer and freeze like any other.
when it is of proper consistency, remove the beater, cork up the
freezer, pack in more ice and salt, cover the whole closely with thick
newspapers and let it rest for an hour or two before it is served.
this is a most delicious cream.




candy


chocolate caramels.

from mrs. carrington mason, of tennessee, alternate lady manager.

one pound white sugar; one-quarter pound chocolate; four
tablespoonfuls of molasses; one cup of sweet milk, and a piece of
butter the size of a walnut. boil until it will harden in water.
flavor with vanilla and pour on a buttered slab.


fudges.

from mrs. j, montgomery smith, of wisconsin, alternate lady manager.

four cups granulated sugar; one cup cream; one cup water; one-half
cake chocolate; one-half cup butter. cook until it just holds
together, then add two teaspoonfuls extract of vanilla and pour into
pans, not buttered. when cool enough to bear finger in, stir it until
it no longer runs. it should not grain, but be smooth. cut into
squares.


cream candy.

from mrs. mary payton, of oregon, lady manager.

stir into the white of one egg and one tablespoonful of water sugar
(confectioner's) enough to make into molds. press one-half walnut on
each side and place in a dry place. dates can he used in the same way
as the nuts.




punch


romaine.

from mrs. potter palmer, of chicago, president board of lady managers

_with best wishes for your success, i am very sincerely yours,_

boil together one quart of water and one pint of sugar for about half
an hour; add the juice of six good sized lemons and one orange; strain
and set away to cool. then prepare the following: boil together one
gill of sugar and one gill of water for eighteen minutes. while the
syrup is cooking, beat the whites of four eggs very stiff, and into
these pour the hot syrup very slowly--beating all the time, and
continue to beat a few minutes after it is all in. set this away to
cool. place the first mixture in the freezer and freeze by turning it
all the time for twenty minutes. then take off the cover, remove the
beater and add one gill of sherry, two tablespoonfuls jamaica rum and
the meringue, mixing this well with a spoon into the frozen
preparation. cover again and set away until time to serve.

serve in punch glasses, as a course between entres and roast.


roman punch.

from mrs. john r. wilson, of south dakota, lady manager.

three pounds pulverized sugar; three quarts of water; the juice of
eight lemons. soak two tablespoonfuls of gelatine in a little of the
water; boil all together for a moment, then cool and strain; add one-
half pint of rum and the whites of eight eggs _without beating_.
freeze.


kirsch punch.

place in a vessel half a pound of powdered sugar, with one quart of
cold water; grate in the rind of a large lemon or of two smaller ones,
squeezing in the juice of three good-sized ones, or four, if small.
beat this thoroughly for five minutes. taste the mixture and add more
powdered sugar if desired sweeter; then strain through a sieve into
the freezer. stir into this two gills of kirsch. freeze it as you
would an ice cream. serve in twelve punch glasses.


apricot sorbet.

from mrs. m. d. owings, of washington, lady manager.

take twelve fine, sound apricots; wipe carefully, cut them in two,
remove the stones, and put them in a vessel with half a pound of
powdered sugar, mashing them thoroughly. then take two ounces of
bitter almonds; peel and mash these while wet; add one gill of cold
water and one ounce of powdered sugar, mashing the whole together.
place a muslin cloth over the vessel containing the mashed apricots
and through it press the almond mixture. stir all this together for
four minutes; then add the juice of three lemons and a pint and a half
of cold water. beat thoroughly, then strain through a fine sieve into
the freezer, and freeze as you do ice cream.


pineapple sherbet.

from mrs. governor edwin c. burleigh, of maine, second vice-president
board of lady managers.

one quart grated pineapple, two heaping tablespoonfuls gelatine
dissolved in hot water, one quart water, one quart sugar, juice of one
large lemon, whites of two eggs well beaten put in just before
freezing.


orange water ice.

from mrs. theo. f. armstrong, of delaware, alternate lady manager.

eight oranges, two lemons, the grated rind of two of the oranges
boiled in a little water and then strained, two tablespoonfuls of corn
starch mixed with a little cold water; then pour boiling water on the
starch; put in the juice of oranges and lemons after straining; one
and one-half pounds sugar; add enough water to make one gallon, then
freeze.


orange frappe.

from miss annie m. mahan, of west virginia, alternate lady manager.

one pint orange juice, one pint water, one pint sugar, juice of two
lemons, grated rind of two oranges, partially freeze and pack in ice
only.




beverages


egg nogg.

from mrs. w. w. kimball, of chicago, lady manager.

one tablespoon of sugar; the yolk of one egg beaten with sugar; beat
the white separately, stiff; add four spoons of brandy to beaten yolk;
put half the white into mixture; half a glass of cream; then put the
rest of the white on top.


our grandmother's syllabub.

from mrs. sarah s. c. angell of michigan, lady manager.

one quart rich cream, juice and peel three lemons, one pint sherry
wine, one quart pulverized sugar. grate the lemon peels and express
the juice, add sugar and pour over these the wine; stir until sugar is
thoroughly moistened and then slowly add the cream. when mixed take
whip-dash and with a tablespoon remove the floating bubbles which rise
to the surface. drop the contents of your spoon into lemonade or
champagne glasses, continuing thin process until all the cream is
whipped. if the mixture becomes too thick and creamy to make bubbles,
dilute it with sweet milk. this quantity will make thirty or forty
glasses or fill a four-quart glass howl. great care must be taken not
to dip the spoon too deeply into the mixture, the froth is what is
desired.


claret punch.

from mrs. frona eunice wait, of california, alternate lady manager.

take half a gallon of good claret and a pint of old whisky and mix
them thoroughly; sweeten to taste by mixing the sugar with a little
water to dissolve it before it comes in contact with the alcohol. take
a can of pineapple, or one fresh one, and chop fine, put juice and all
into the punch; set the whole mixture on ice and let it stand at least
three hours before using; serve some portion of the pineapple with
each glass.


beef tea for children.

from mrs. ida m. ball, of delaware, lady manager.

use soup meat without bone cut into dice, and to every pound of meat
use one pint of cold water. cut up the meat on a dish, not on a board,
as the latter absorbs the juices. have the proper measure of water
beside you in a soup basin or bowl, and as you cut up the meat
sprinkle it moderately with salt and throw it into the cold water;
there let it remain for two hours, then put it all into a sauce pan
and set it on the fire. watch carefully the first rising and skim and
secure this as it is the very essence of the beef; put it into a clean
bowl and let the beef go on boiling ten minutes, no longer; then pour
the extract through a sieve to the first skimmings; stir before using.
for older children than infants you may flavor with onion and a few
cloves.




chafing dish


lobster  la newburg.

from miss mary crease sears, of massachusetts, alternate lady manager.

two good-sized boiled lobsters. pick out all the meat and cut into
one-inch pieces. place in a chafing dish with one ounce of butter, a
pinch of salt and a very little red pepper. cook five minutes, then
add a wine glass of madeira. cook about three minutes, then add the
yolks of three eggs well beaten with half a pint of sweet cream or
milk; cook until it thickens, then serve.


omelet.

from mrs. mary s. lockwood, of district of columbia, lady
manager-at-large.

beat four fresh eggs slightly with two tablespoonfuls of cream; season
with pepper and salt; put a tablespoonful of butter in the chafing
dish, and when very hot pour in the egg; scrape up rapidly from all
parts of the pan the cooked egg, letting the liquid portion follow the
knife. it takes from forty to sixty seconds to cook it, then slip the
knife under the left edge and fold the omelet over quickly and
lightly. serve on a hot dish.


welsh rarebit.

from mrs. col. james a. mulligan, of chicago, lady manager.

take one pound of american cheese, cut up in small pieces, place in a
chafing dish and season with half a salt-spoonful of red pepper; stir
for ten minutes or until cheese is thoroughly melted; have ready six
large pieces of toast on a very hot dish; cover each slice with the
melted cheese; serve very hot as a relish.


shrimp  la newburg

from mrs. harriet t. upton, of ohio, alternate lady manager.

one tablespoon butter; when hot add one tablespoon flour, four
tablespoons cream stirred together; yolks of two eggs, add salt, red
pepper and mace; bring to a scalding point, add shrimps and four
tablespoons of sherry; serve at once.


chicken with currie.

from mrs. i. l. requa, of california, alternate lady manager.

mix half a teacupful of butter and two tablespoonfuls of currie powder
thoroughly together and put into the chafing dish with one small onion
cut fine; stew together four minutes and then add half a teacupful of
stock or broth, half teacupful milk, salt and pepper to taste; when
this has become smooth add the chicken and stir constantly in the
sauce, stewing nine minutes; serve with rice croquettes.


fresh mushrooms  la crme.

from mrs. francis b. clarke, of minnesota, lady manager.

take a pound of fresh mushrooms, the larger the more tender; peel
carefully the thin skin from the tops and wash thoroughly; then cut
into broad strips or halves, if small, and place in a sauce pan with a
pint of cream; let them boil slowly for a half to three-quarters of an
hour, until tender; then take a little flour and a tablespoonful of
butter, rub thoroughly together and mix into the cream; do not get it
too thick; add salt and pepper and serve on hot toast. this also is
very nice served in a chafing dish. be sure to have the water in the
under pan. serve on toast. this makes a delicious luncheon dish.


mock terrapin.

from mrs. margaret blaine salisbury, of utah, eighth vice-president
board of lady managers.

put in the chafing dish the dark meat of cold chicken, turkey or
grouse, cut in small dice, with half a pint of cream or stock, and
when it comes to a boil stir in the following mixture: two tablespoons
of butter rubbed into a smooth paste with a tablespoonful of flour and
the yolks of three eggs, a teaspoonful dry mustard, a little cayenne
pepper and salt, all mixed with a little cream or stock; let simmer a
few minutes (not boil) and when ready to serve stir in a large wine-
glass of madeira.

_wishing you the success you deserve in the accomplishment of this
laudable project, believe me, sincerely yours_.




contents


bread.

 steamed brown bread,         mrs. virginia c. meredith,
 light bread,                 mrs. governor james p. eagle,
 franklin gems,               mrs. l. m. n. stevens,
 baking powder biscuit,       mrs. rollin a. edgerton,
 french rolls,                mrs. sallie howard bush,
 risen muffins,               mrs. sallie howard bush,
 breakfast rolls,             miss meta telfair mclaws,
 pocket-book rolls,           mrs. ida m. ball
 potato rolls,                mrs. theo, f. armstrong,
 graham gems,                 mrs. louise campbell,
 corn cake,                   miss hattie t. hundley,
 bachelors' corn pone,        mrs. mary b. p. black,
 corn bread,                  mrs. t. j. butler,
 corn meal muffins,           mrs. parthenia p. rue,
 baked corn bread,            mrs. minna g. hooker,
 steamed brown bread,         mrs. b. v. mcconnell,
 raised brown bread,          mrs. ellen m. chandler,
 boston brown bread,          mrs. governor james p. eagle,
 strawberry short cake,       mrs. governor edwin c. burleigh
 strawberry short cake,       mrs. augusta truman,
 orange short cake,           mrs. m. d. owings,
 sally lunn,                  mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe,
 ham toast,                   mrs. rosine ryan,
 oat meal,                    mrs. george hoxworth,
 brewis,                      mrs. francis e. hale,
 sandwich dressing,           mrs. mariam d. cooper,
 oysters,
 bouillon,

soup.

 amber soup,                  carrie v. shuman,
 mock-turtle soup,            mrs. beriah wilkins,
 julienne soup,               mrs. susan r. ashley,
 noodle soup,                 mrs. frona eunice wait,
 corn soup,                   mrs. m. d. thatcher,
 celery soup,                 mrs. alice b. castleman,
 oyster soup,                 mrs. helen c. brayton,
 bisque of crab or crawfish,  mrs. belle 11. perkins,
 potato puree,                mrs. james r. deane,
 asparagus soup,              mrs. laura p. coleman,
 tomato soup,                 mrs. ida m. ball,
 tomato soup,                 mrs. e. j. p. howes,
 gumbo file,                  mrs. anna m. fosdick,
 gumbo soup,                  mrs. virginia t. smith,
 chicken gumbo with oysters,  mrs. alice b. castleman,
 okra soup,                   miss floride cuningham,
 black bean soup,             mrs. m. d. foley,
 bean soup,                   mrs. anne b. patrick,
 soup regency,                mrs. isabella beecher hooker,
 pea soup,                    mrs. whiting s. clark,
 clam chowder,                mrs. charles h. olmstead,
 clam chowder,                miss lida m. russell,

fish.

 soles or smelts cooked       mrs. james r. deane,
   with maitre d'hotel sauce,
 baked shad,                  mrs. mary r. kinder,
 cubion,                      mrs. anna m. fosdick,
 cod fish balls,              mrs. a. m. palmer,
 salmon croquettes,           mrs. george w. lamar,

shell fish.

 maryland terrapins,          mrs. william reed,
 terrapin white stew,         mrs. james r. deane,
 white stew of terrapin,      mrs. george w. lamar,
 terrapin croquettes,         mrs. w. w. kimball,
 deviled lobster,             mrs. joseph c. straughan,
 lobster croquettes,          mrs. louise l. barton,
 deviled crabs,               mrs. cora l. bartlett,
 deviled crabs,               mrs. anna e. m. farnum,
 deviled crabs,               miss jennie torreyson,
 soft shell crabs             mrs. george w. lamar
 frog legs                    mrs. ella ray miller,
 pannee oysters,              mrs. alice b. castleman,
 creamed oysters,             mrs. mira b. f. ladd,
 "little pigs in blankets,"   mrs. isabella laning candee,
 escalloped oysters,          miss meta telfair mclaws,
 creamed shrimps,             mrs. m. d. foley,

sauces.

 sauce mousseline,            mrs. wilson patterson,
 tartar sauce,                mrs. myra bradwell,
 boiled egg sauce,            mrs. jakes r. doolittle,  jr.,

meats.

 filet of beef,               mrs. governor oglesby,
 roast beef,                  mrs. matilda b. carse,
 yorkshire pudding,           mrs. harriet a. lucas,
 roulards,                    mrs. ralph trautmann,
 beef loaf,                   mrs. carrington mason,
 hash                         mrs. annie l. y. orff,
 mutton chops,                miss mary b. hancock,
 roast lamb,                  mrs. robt. b. mitchell,
 lamb chops,                  mrs. hester a. hanback,
 potted tongue,               mrs. frank h. daniell,
 veal croquettes,             mrs. isabella beecher hooker,
 veal croquettes,             miss katharine l. minor,
 veal pot pie,                miss susan w. ball,
 casselettes de veau,         mrs. james r. deane,
 veal fricassee,              mrs. t. j. butler,
 veal loaf,                   mrs. whiting s. clark,

sweetbreads.

 sweet-bread croquettes,     mrs. schuyler colfax,
 sweetbreads and oysters,    senora teresa a. de symington,
 sweetbreads and mushrooms,  mrs. p. b. winston,
 sweetbreads en coquille,    miss jennie torreyson,
 sweetbread patties,         miss wilhelmine reitz,

poultry.

 boiled chicken,             mrs. edwin c. burleigh
 jambolaya,                  miss katharine l. minor,
 chicken livers, en          mrs. col. james a. mulligan,
   brocuhette, with bacon,
 pollo con arroz,            senora don manuel chaves,
 pollo con tomates,          senora don manuel chaves,
 tamales de chile,           senora don manuel chaves,
 coquilles de voloille,      miss josephine shakspeare,
 croquettes                  mrs. l. c. gillespie,
 chicken croquettes,         mrs. sarah h. bixby,
 curry of chicken in puffs,  senora teresa a. de symington,
 pilauf,                     miss floride cunningham,
 fricassee chicken,          mrs. helen c. brayton,
 a good roast turkey,        mrs. helen a. peck,
 dressing for turkey.        mrs. w. h. felton,
 how to cook chestnuts,      miss eloise l. roman,

game.

 wild duck in maryland,      mrs. william reed,
 snipe and woodcock broiled  mrs. rufus s. frost,
   on toast,
 prairie chicken,            mrs. e. s. thomson,

vegetables.

 vegetable oyster,           mrs. governor bagley,
 cauliflower with tartar     mrs. myra bradwell,
   sauce,
 scalloped potatoes,         mrs. beriah wilkins,
 escalloped sweet potatoes,  mrs. p. b. winston,
 potato puff,                mrs. h. f. brown,
 potato croquettes,          mrs. frances p. burrows,
 potatoes--mashed,           mrs. e.j.p. howes,
 boston baked beans,         mrs. elizabeth c. langworthy,
 lima beans,                 mrs. mariam d. cooper,
 baked tomatoes,             mrs. governor rickards,
 baked tomatoes,             mrs. augusta truman,
 stewed tomatoes,            miss mary h. krout,
 beets,                      mrs. governor john m. stone,
 parsnips--stewed,           mrs. m. r. lee,
 stuffed green peppers,      mrs. alice b. castleman,
 corn oysters,               mrs. john s. briggs,
 fried egg plant,            mrs. lily rosecrans toole,
 macaroni--good,             mrs. sam s. fifield
 rice as a vegetable,        mrs. charles h. olmstead
 cranberries,                mrs. lana a. bates

eggs.

 plain omelet with           mrs. l. brace shattuck
   eight eggs,
 green corn omelet,          mrs. frances p. burrows
 omelet with ham,            mrs. naomi t. compton
 omelet--plain,              miss mary e. busselle
 stuffed eggs,               mrs. ralph trautmann
 deviled eggs for luncheon   mrs. isabella laning candee
   or picnics,
 escalloped eggs,            mrs. helen a. peck
 how to take egg,            mrs. naomi t. compton

salad.

 lobster salad,              mrs. charles price
 chicken salad,              mrs. a. m. palmer
 southern chicken salad,     mrs. charles j. mcclung
 chicken salad,              mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe
 vegetable salad,            mrs. florence h. kidder
 string bean salad,          mrs. caroline e. dennis
 excellent potato salad,     mrs. genevieve m. guthrie
 tomato salad,               mrs. mira b. f. ladd
 tomato salad,               miss mary crease sears
 cabbage salad,              mrs. theresa j. cochran
 fish salad,                 mrs. mary c. bell
 salad dressing,             miss loraine pearce bucklin

doughnuts and fritters.

 famous doughnuts,           miss frances e. willard
 raised doughnuts,           mrs. ellen m. chandler
 doughnuts,                  mrs. laura e. howey
 doughnuts,                  miss annie m. mahan
 callas,                     mrs. belle h. perkins
 apple fritters,             mrs. m. p. hart
 corn fritters,              mrs. e. v. mcconnell
 clam fritters,              mrs. sallie s. cotten
 white corn meal cakes       mrs. sarah s. c. angell,
   for breakfast
 corn griddle cakes or old   miss lily irene jackson
   virginia slap jacks,
 fried mush,                 mrs. george hoxworth
 superior waffles,           mrs. mary b. p. black
 mexican enchiladas,         mrs. franc lusr albright

preserves.

 tomato conserve,            mrs. caroline e. dennis
 orange marmalade,           mrs. governor oglesby
 compote of apples,          mrs. hattie e. sladden
 steamed peaches,            mrs. w. newton linch,
 quince preserves,           mrs. m. p. hart,
 watermelon preserves,       mrs. h. k. ingram,
 blackberry jam,             mrs. mary s. mcneal,
 canned spiced blackberries, mrs. h. j. peto,
 spiced green grapes,        mrs. george a. mumford,
 orange jelly,               mrs. theresa j. cochran,
 currant jelly,              mrs. m. p. h. beeson,
 crab apple jelly,           mrs. genevieve m. guthrie,

pickles and catsup.

 pickled onions,             mrs. harriet a. lucas,
 oil pickles,                mrs. ida m. ball,
 mixed pickles,              mrs. sam. s. fifield,
 cucumber pickles,           mrs. parthenia p. rue,
 green cucumber pickle,      mrs. cora payne jackson,
 ripe cucumber pickle,       miss mary elliott mccandless,
 gooseberry catsup,          mrs. amey m. starkweather,
 cabbage pickle,             mrs. carrington mason,
 picalilly,                  mrs. ella kay miller,
 sweet pickled peaches,      mrs. nellie b. plumer,
 chow-chow pickles,          mrs. h. k. ingram,
 mustard chow-chow,          mrs. alice b. castleman,
 chow-chow,                  miss mary elliott mccandless,

cheese.

 cheese fonda,               miss hattie t. hundley,
 cheese sticks,              mrs. margaret m. ratcliffe,

pies.

 lemon pie,                  mrs. l. m. n. stevens
 ideal lemon pie,            mrs. ida l. turner
 lemon pie,                  mrs. virginia. c. meredith
 lemon pie,                  miss lucia b. perea
 pumpkin pie,                mrs. frances c. holley
 apple custard pie,          mrs. annie l. y. orff
 cream pie,                  mrs. m. k. lee
 cream pie,                  mrs. louise campbell
 apple pie,                  mrs. alice vineyard brown
 pie crust,                  mrs. annie l. y. orff
 mince meat,                 mrs. marcia louise gould
 mince meat,                 mrs. laura p. coleman

pudding.

 graham christmas pudding,   mrs. rollin a. edgerton
 graham pudding,             mrs. george a. mumford
 lady ross fig pudding,      mrs. wm. p. lynde
 alexandre pudding,          mrs. m. d. thatcher
 plum pudding,               mrs. florence h. kidder
 english plum pudding,       mrs. phoebe m. hartpence
 english plum pudding,       mrs. s. w. mclaughlin
 vegetable plum pudding,     miss mary e. busseler
 plum pudding,               mrs. helen c. brayton
 christmas plum pudding,     mrs. alice j. whalen
 cherry pudding,             mrs. louise l. barton
 bread and butter pudding,   mrs. nancy huston banks
 delicate indian pudding,    mrs. s. w. mclaughlin
 baked indian pudding,       mrs. marian d. cooper
 prune roll,                 mrs. clark waring
 prune pudding,              mrs. hattie e. sladden
 prune pudding,              mrs. mary s. mcneal
 prune pudding,              mrs. john r. wilson
 bread pudding,              mrs. kate canthon mcdaniel
 chocolate pudding,          miss mary b. hancock
 danish pudding,             miss mary b. hancock
 delicious pudding,          mrs. elizabeth c. langworthy
 suet pudding,               mrs. helen m. barker
 suet pudding,               mrs. leander stone
 queen pudding,              mrs. l. c. gillespie
 steam pudding,              mrs. john s. briggs
 steam pudding,              mrs. clara l. mcadow
 baked huckleberry pudding,  mrs. nellie b. plumer
 minnie's lemon pudding,     mrs. h. j. peto
 cup pudding,                mrs. marie j. gaston
 italian roll,               mrs. f. h. daniell
 chaperone pudding,          mrs. annie l. y. orff
 apple pudding,              mrs. ida l. turner
 baked apple dumpling,       mrs. schuyler colfax
 foam sauce,                 mrs. carrington mason

cake.

 sponge cake,                mrs. isabella beecher hooker
 sponge cake,                mrs. martha a. griggs
 sponge cake,                mrs. marie j. gaston
 north dakota sponge cake,   mrs. alice vineyard brown
 chaperone sponge cake,      mrs. annie l. y. orff
 new engl'd raised           miss frances s. ivys
   loaf cake,
 french loaf cake,           mrs. martha a. griggs
 grandmother's bread cake,   mrs. mary c. bell
 old virginia bread cake,    mrs. katherine s. g. paul
 bread cake,                 mrs. clara l. mcadow
 corn starch cake,           mrs. clara l. mcadow
 exposition orange cake,     mrs. s. e. verdenal
 orange cake,                mrs. frances welles shepard
 angel food,                 mrs. mary c. harrison
 angel cake,                 mrs. daniel hall
 sunshine cake,              mrs. daniel hall
 election cake,              mrs. helen c. brayton
 connecticut election cake,  mrs. virginia t. smith
 almond cream cake,          mrs. flora beall ginty
 velvet cake,                mrs. sallie s. cotten
 caramel cake,               mrs. james r. doolittle, jr.
 a caramel cake,             mrs. franc luse albright
 roll jelly cake,            mrs. flora beall ginty
 chocolate cake,             mrs. ralph trautmann
 georgia's cake,             mrs. clare waring
 chess cake,                 mrs. carrington mason
 fruit cake,                 mrs. a. k. delaney,
 english fruit cake,         mrs. phoebe m. hartpence,
 fruit cake,                 mrs. m. p. h. beeson,
 fruit cake,                 mrs. hester a. hanback,
 sally white cake,           mrs. florence h. kidder,
 delicate cake,              mrs. john a. logan,
 delicate cake,              mrs. harriet t. upton,
 white cake,                 mrs. governor john m. stone,
 walnut cake,                mrs. francks c. holley,
 nut cake,                   miss josephine shakspeare,
 nut cake,                   mrs. minna g. hooker,
 nut cake,                   mrs. alice houghton,
 pecan cake,                 mrs. russell b. harrison,
 cake made with cream,       mrs. sarah h. bixby,
 cream frosting,             mrs. mary payton,
 almond icing,               mrs. lana a. bates,
 soft gingerbread,           mrs. ida m. ball,
 columbian ginger cake,      mrs. s. e. verdenal,
 gingerbread,                mrs. sam. s. fifield,
 soft gingerbread,           mrs. mary k. kinder,
 loaf ginger cake,           mrs. a. k. delaney,

cookies.

 hermits or fruit cookies,   mrs. susan g. cooke,
 cookies,                    miss lily irene jackson,
 "corinita" cookies,         miss lucia b. perea,
 cookies,                    mrs. robt. b. mitchell,
 ginger cookies,             mrs. clara i. mcadow,
 ginger snaps,               mrs. sam. s. fifield,
 french jumbles,             mrs. e, s. thompson,
 sand tarts,                 miss eloise l. roman,
 lady fingers,               mrs. m. d. owings,

desserts.

 pineapple sponge,           mrs. matilda b. carse,
 pineapple souffl,          mrs. james k. deane,
 peach sponge,               mrs. joseph c. straughan,
 hamburg cream,              mrs. ida m. ball,
 chocolat mouss,            miss josephine shakspeare,
 chocolat souffl,           mrs. alice houghton,
 chocolat meringue,          mrs. katherine s. g. paul,
 bavarian cream,             mrs. alice j. whalen,
 gelatine cream,             miss mary elliott mcandless,
 nob hill pudding,           miss lida m. russell,
 apple charlotte,            mrs. john a. logan,
 charlotte de russe,         mrs. charles price,
 charlotte russe,            mrs. marcia louise gould,
 charlotte russe,            mrs. susan w. ball,
 charlotte russe,            mrs. george w. lamar,
 strawberry blanc mange,     mrs. benedette b. tobin,
 snow pudding,               mrs. susan g. cookk,
 wine or gelatine jelly,     mrs. cabrington mason,
 fruit jelly,                miss wilhelmine reitz,
 a dainty dessert,           mrs. solomon thatcher,  jr.,
 tamales de dolce,           seora don manuel chaves,
 a cheap dessert,            mrs. katy canthon mcdaniel,
 bananas in jelly,           mrs. governor rickards,
 almond blanc mange,         mrs. benedette b. tobin,
 floating island,            mrs. rosine ryan,
 boiled custard,             mrs. charles i. mcclung,
 snow balls,                 mrs. nancy huston banks,
 lemon custard,              mrs. ida m. ball,

ice cream.

 fruit cream,                mrs. h. f. brown,
 caramel ice cream,          mrs. lily rosencrans toole,
 tutti frutti ice cream,     mrs. j. montgomery smith,
 vanilla ice cream,          mrs. mary c. harrison,
 maraschino ice cream,       miss mary elliott mccandless,

candy.

 chocolate caramels,         mrs. carrington mason,
 fudges,                     mrs. j. montgomery smith,
 cream candy,                mrs. mary payton,

punch.

 romaine,                    mrs. potter palmer,
 roman punch,                mrs. john r. wilson.
 kirsch punch,               carrie v. shuman,
 apricot sorbet,             mrs. m.d. owings,
 pineapple sherbet,          mrs. governor edwin c. burleigh,
 orange water ice,           mrs. theo. f. armstrong,
 orange frappe,             miss annie m. mahan,

beverages.

 egg nogg,                   mrs. w. w. kimball,
 our grandmother's syllabub, mrs. sarah s. c. angell,
 claret punch,               mrs. frona eunice wait,
 beef tea for children,      mrs. ida m. ball,

chafing dish.

 lobster  la newburg,       miss mary crease sears,
 omelet,                     mrs. mary s. lockwood,
 welsh rarebit,              mrs. col. james a. mulligan,
 shrimp  la newburg,        mrs. harriet t. upton,
 chicken with currie,        mrs. i. l. requa,
 fresh mushrooms  la crme, mrs. francis b. clarke,
 mock terrapin,              mrs. margaret blaine salisbury,
