

introduction.


in the latter part of the seventeenth century, and during nearly the whole
of the eighteenth, the literature of rome exercised an imperial sway over
european taste. pope thought fit to assume an apologetic tone when he
clothed homer in an english dress, and reminded the world that, as
compared with virgil, the greek poet had at least the merit of coming
first. his own mind was of an emphatically latin order. the great poets of
his day mostly based their art on the canons recognised by horace. and
when poetry was thus affected, it was natural that philosophy, history,
and criticism should yield to the same influence. a rhetorical form, a
satirical spirit, and an appeal to common sense as supreme judge, stamp
most of the writers of western europe as so far pupils of horace, cicero,
and tacitus. at present the tide has turned. we are living in a period of
strong reaction. the nineteenth century not only differs from the
eighteenth, but in all fundamental questions is opposed to it. its
products have been strikingly original. in art, poetry, science, the
spread of culture, and the investigation of the basis of truth, it yields
to no other epoch of equal length in the history of modern times. if we go
to either of the nations of antiquity to seek for an animating impulse, it
will not be rome but greece that will immediately suggest itself to us.
greek ideas of aesthetic beauty, and greek freedom of abstract thought,
are being disseminated in the world with unexampled rapidity. rome, and
her soberer, less original, and less stimulating literature, find no place
for influence. the readiness with which the leading nations drink from the
well of greek genius points to a special adaptation between the two.
epochs of upheaval, when thought is rife, progress rapid, and tradition,
political or religious, boldly examined, turn, as if by necessity, to
ancient greece for inspiration. the church of the second and third
centuries, when christian thought claimed and won its place among the
intellectual revolutions of the world, did not disdain the analogies of
greek philosophy. the renaissance owed its rise, and the reformation much
of its fertility, to the study of greek. and the sea of intellectual
activity which now surges round us moves ceaselessly about questions which
society has not asked itself since greece started them more than twenty
centuries age. on the other hand, periods of order, when government is
strong and progress restrained, recognise their prototypes in the
civilisation of rome, and their exponents in her literature. such was the
time of the church's greatest power: such was also that of the fully
developed monarchy in france, and of aristocratic ascendancy in england.
thus the two literatures wield alternate influence; the one on the side of
liberty, the other on the side of government; the one as urging restless
movement towards the ideal, the other as counselling steady acceptance of
the real.

from a more restricted point of view, the utility of latin literature may
be sought in the practical standard of its thought, and in the almost
faultless correctness of its composition. on the former there is no need
to enlarge, for it has always been amply recognised. the latter excellence
fits it above all for an educational use. there is probably no language
which in this respect comes near to it. the romans have been called with
justice a nation of grammarians. the greatest commanders and statesmen did
not disdain to analyse the syntax and fix the spelling of their language.
from the outset of roman literature a knowledge of scientific grammar
prevailed. hence the act of composition and the knowledge of its theory
went hand in hand. the result is that among roman classical authors scarce
a sentence can be detected which offends against logical accuracy, or
defies critical analysis. in this latin stands alone. the powerful
intellect of an aeschylus or thucydides did not prevent them from
transgressing laws which in their day were undiscovered, and which their
own writing helped to form. nor in modern times could we find a single
language in which the idioms of the best writers could be reduced to
conformity with strict rule. french, which at first sight appears to offer
such an instance, is seen on a closer view to be fuller of illogical
idioms than any other language; its symmetrical exactness arises from
clear combination and restriction of single forms to a single use.
english, at least in its older form, abounds in special idioms, and german
is still less likely to be adduced. as long, therefore, as a penetrating
insight into syntactical structure is considered desirable, so long will
latin offer the best field for obtaining it. in gaining accuracy, however,
classical latin suffered a grievous loss. it became a cultivated as
distinct from a natural language. it was at first separated from the
dialect of the people, and afterwards carefully preserved from all
contamination by it. only a restricted number of words were admitted into
its select vocabulary. we learn from servius that virgil was censured for
admitting _avunculus_ into epic verse; and quintilian says that the
prestige of ancient use alone permits the appearance in literature of
words like _balare_, _hinnire_, and all imitative sounds. [1] spontaneity,
therefore, became impossible, and soon invention also ceased; and the
imperial writers limit their choice to such words as had the authority of
classical usage. in a certain sense, therefore, latin was studied as a
dead language, while it was still a living one. classical composition,
even in the time of juvenal, must have been a labour analogous to, though,
of course, much less than, that of the italian scholars of the sixteenth
century. it was inevitable that when the repositaries of the literary
idiom were dispersed, it should at once fall into irrecoverable disuse;
and though never properly a dead language, should have remained as it
began, an artificially cultivated one. [2] an important claim on our
attention put forward by roman literature is founded upon its actual
historical position. imitative it certainly is. [3] but it is not the only
one that is imitative. all modern literature is so too, in so far as it
makes a conscious effort after an external standard. rome may seem to be
more of a copyist than any of her successors; but then they have among
other models rome herself to follow. the way in which roman taste,
thought, and expression have found their way into the modern world, makes
them peculiarly worthy of study; and the deliberate method of undertaking
literary composition practised by the great writers and clearly traceable
in their productions, affords the best possible study of the laws and
conditions under which literary excellence is attainable. rules for
composition would be hard to draw from greek examples, and would need a
greek critic to formulate them. but the conscious workmanship of the
romans shows us technical method as separable from the complex aesthetic
result, and therefore is an excellent guide in the art.

the traditional account of the origin of literature at rome, accepted by
the romans themselves, is that it was entirely due to contact with greece.
many scholars, however, have advanced the opinion that, at an earlier
epoch, etruria exercised an important influence, and that much of that
artistic, philosophical, and literary impulse, which we commonly ascribe
to greece, was in its elements, at least, really due to her. mommsen's
researches have re-established on a firmer basis the superior claims of
greece. he shows that etruscan civilisation was itself modelled in its
best features on the hellenic, that it was essentially weak and
unprogressive and, except in religion (where it held great sway) and in
the sphere of public amusements, unable permanently to impress itself upon
rome. [4] thus the literary epoch dates from the conquest of magna
graecia. after the fall of tarentum the romans were suddenly familiarised
with the chief products of the hellenic mind; and the first punic war
which followed, unlike all previous wars, was favourable to the effects of
this introduction. for it was waged far from roman soil, and so relieved
the people from those daily alarms which are fatal to the calm demanded by
study. moreover it opened sicily to their arms, where, more than in any
part of europe except greece itself, the treasures of greek genius were
enshrined. a systematic treatment of latin literature cannot therefore
begin before livius andronicus. the preceding ages, barren as they were of
literary effort, afford little to notice except the progress of the
language. to this subject a short essay has been devoted, as well as to
the elements of literary development which existed in rome before the
regular literature. there are many signs in tradition and early history of
relations between greece and rome; as the decemviral legislation, the
various consultations of the delphic oracle, the legends of pythagoras and
numa, of lake regillus, and, indeed, the whole story of the tarquins; the
importation of a greek alphabet, and of several names familiar to greek
legend--_ulysses, poenus, catamitus_, &c.--all antecedent to the pyrrhic
war. but these are neither numerous enough nor certain enough to afford a
sound basis for generalisation. they have therefore been merely touched on
in the introductory essays, which simply aim at a compendious registration
of the main points; all fuller information belonging rather to the
antiquarian department of history and to philology than to a sketch of the
written literature. the divisions of the subject will be those naturally
suggested by the history of the language, and recently adopted by teuffel,
_i.e._--

1. the sixth and seventh centuries of the city (240-80 b.c.), from livius
to sulla.

2. the golden age, from cicero to ovid (80 b.c.-a.d. 14).

3. the period of the decline, from the accession of tiberius to the death
of marcus aurelius (14-180 a.d.).

these periods are distinguished by certain strongly marked
characteristics. the first, which comprises the history of the legitimate
drama, of the early epos and satire, and the beginning of prose
composition, is marked by immaturity of art and language, by a vigorous
but ill-disciplined imitation of greek poetical models, and in prose by a
dry sententiousness of style, gradually giving way to a clear and fluent
strength, which was characteristic of the speeches of gracchus and
antonius. this was the epoch when literature was popular; or at least more
nearly so than at any subsequent period. it saw the rise and fall of
dramatic art: in other respects it merely introduced the forms which were
carried to perfection in the ciceronian and augustan ages. the language
did not greatly improve in smoothness, or adaptation to express finished
thought. the ancients, indeed, saw a difference between ennius, pacuvius,
and accius, but it may be questioned whether the advance would be
perceptible by us. still the _labor limae_ unsparingly employed by
terence, the rules of good writing laid down by lucilius, and the labours
of the great grammarians and orators at the close of the period, prepared
the language for that rapid development which it at once assumed in the
masterly hands of cicero.

the second period represents the highest excellence in prose and poetry.
the prose era came first, and is signalised by the names of cicero,
sallust, and caesar. the celebrated writers were now mostly men of action
and high position in the state. the principles of the language had become
fixed; its grammatical construction was thoroughly understood, and its
peculiar genius wisely adapted to those forms of composition in which it
was naturally capable of excelling. the perfection of poetry was not
attained until the time of augustus. two poets of the highest renown had
indeed flourished in the republican period; but though endowed with lofty
genius they are greatly inferior to their successors in sustained art,
_e.g._ the constructions of prose still dominate unduly in the domain of
verse, and the intricacies of rhythm are not fully mastered. on the other
hand, prose has, in the augustan age, lost somewhat of its breadth and
vigour. even the beautiful style of livy shows traces of that intrusion of
the poetic element which made such destructive inroads into the manner of
the later prose writers. in this period the writers as a rule are not
public men, but belong to what we should call the literary class. they
wrote not for the public but for the select circle of educated men whose
ranks were gradually narrowing their limits to the great injury of
literature. if we ask which of the two sections of this period marks the
most strictly national development, the answer must be--the ciceronian;
for while the advancement of any literature is more accurately tested by
its prose writers than by its poets, this is specially the case with the
romans, whose genius was essentially prosaic. attention now began to be
bestowed on physical science, and the applied sciences also received
systematic treatment. the rhetorical element, which had hitherto been
overpowered by the oratorical, comes prominently forward; but it does not
as yet predominate to a prejudicial extent.

the third period, though of long duration, has its chief characteristics
clearly defined from the beginning. the foremost of these is unreality,
arising from the extinction of freedom and consequent loss of interest in
public life. at the same time, the romans, being made for political
activity, did not readily content themselves with the less exciting
successes of literary life. the applause of the lecture-room was a poor
substitute for the thunders of the assembly. hence arose a declamatory
tone, which strove by frigid and almost hysterical exaggeration to make up
for the healthy stimulus afforded by daily contact with affairs. the vein
of artificial rhetoric, antithesis, and epigram, which prevails from lucan
to fronto, owes its origin to this forced contentment with an uncongenial
sphere. with the decay of freedom, taste sank, and that so rapidly that
seneca and lucan transgress nearly as much against its canons as writers
two generations later. the flowers which had bloomed so delicately in the
wreath of the augustan poets, short-lived as fragrant, scatter their
sweetness no more in the rank weed-grown garden of their successors.

the character of this and of each epoch will be dwelt on more at length as
it comes before us for special consideration, as well as the social or
religious phenomena which influenced the modes of thought or expression.
the great mingling of nationalities in rome during the empire necessarily
produced a corresponding divergence in style, if not in ideas.
nevertheless, although we can trace the national traits of a lucan or a
martial underneath their roman culture, the fusion of separate elements in
the vast capital was so complete, or her influence so overpowering, that
the general resemblance far outweighs the differences, and it is easy to
discern the common features which signalise unmistakeably the writers of
the silver age.




book i.


chapter i.

on the earliest remains of the latin language.


the question, who were the earliest inhabitants of italy? is one that
cannot certainly be answered. that some lower race, analogous to those
displaced in other parts of europe [1] by the celts and teutons, existed
in italy at a remote period is indeed highly probable; but it has not been
clearly demonstrated. at the dawn of the historic period, we find the
messapian and iapygian races inhabiting the extreme south and south-west
of italy; and assuming, as we must, that their migrations had proceeded by
land across the apennines, we shall draw the inference that they had been
gradually pushed by stronger immigrants into the furthest corner of the
peninsula. thus we conclude with mommsen that they are to be regarded as
the historical aborigines of italy. they form no part, however, of the
italian race. weak and easily acted upon, they soon ceased to have any
influence on the immigrant tribes, and within a few centuries they had all
but disappeared as a separate nation. the italian races, properly so
called, who possessed the country at the time of the origin of rome, are
referable to two main groups, the latin and the umbrian. of these, the
latin was numerically by far the smaller, and was at first confined within
a narrow and somewhat isolated range of territory. the umbrian stock,
including the samnite or oscan, the volscian and the marsian, had a more
extended area. at one time it possessed the district afterwards known as
etruria, as well as the sabellian and umbrian territories. of the numerous
dialects spoken by this race, two only are in some degree known to us
(chiefly from inscriptions) the umbrian and the oscan. these show a close
affinity with one another, and a decided, though more distant,
relationship with the latin. all three belong to a well-marked division of
the indo-european speech, to which the name of _italic_ is given. its
nearest congener is the hellenic, the next most distant being the celtic.
the hellenic and italic may thus be called sister languages, the celtic
standing in the position of cousin to both, though, on the whole, more
akin to the italic. [2]

the etruscan language is still a riddle to philologists, and until it is
satisfactorily investigated the ethnological position of the people that
spoke it must be a matter of dispute. the few words and forms which have
been deciphered lend support to the otherwise more probable theory that
they were an indo-germanic race only remotely allied to the italians, in
respect of whom they maintained to quite a late period many distinctive
traits. [3] but though the romans were long familiar with the literature
and customs of etruria, and adopted many etruscan words into their
language, neither of these causes influenced the literary development of
the romans in any appreciable degree. italian philology and ethnology have
been much complicated by reference to the etruscan element. it is best to
regard it, like the iapygian, as altogether outside the pale of genuine
italic ethnography.

the main points of correspondence between the italic dialects as a whole,
by which they are distinguished from the greek, are as follow:--firstly,
they all retain the spirants s, j (pronounced y), and v, _e.g. sub,
vespera, janitrices_, beside _upo, espera, einateres_. again, the italian
_u_ is nearer the original sound than the greek. the greeks sounded _u_
like _ii_, and expressed the latin _u_ for the most part by _ou_. on the
other hand the italians lost the aspirated letters _th, ph, ch_, which
remain in greek, and frequently omitted the simple aspirate. they lost
also the dual both in nouns and verbs, and all but a few fragmentary forms
of the middle verb. in inflexion they retain the sign of the ablative
(_d_), and, at least in latin, the dat. plur. in _bus_. they express the
passive by the letter _r_, a weakened form of the reflexive, the principle
of which is reproduced in more than one of the romance languages.

on the other hand, latin differs from the other italian dialects in
numerous points. in pronouns and elsewhere latin _q_ becomes _p_ in
umbrian and oscan _(pis = quis)._ again, oscan had two vowels more than
latin and was much more conservative of diphthongal sounds; it also used
double consonants, which old latin did not. the oscan and umbrian
alphabets were taken from the etruscan, the latin from the greek; hence
the former lacked o q x, and used [symbol] or [symbol] (_san_ or soft _z_)
for _z_ (_zeta = ds_). they possessed the spirant f which they expressed
by [symbol] and used the symbol [symbol] to denote v or w. they preserved
the old genitive in _as_ or _ar_ (lat. _ai, ae_) and the locative, both
which were rarely found in latin; also the indo-european future in _so_
(_didest, herest_) and the infin. in _um_ (_e.g. ezum = esse_).

the old latin alphabet was taken from the dorian alphabet of cumae, a
colony from chaleis, and consisted of twenty-one letters, a b c d e f z h
i k l m n o p q r s t v x, to which the original added three more, o or
[symbol] (_th_), [symbol] (_ph_), and [symbol] (_ch_). these were retained
in latin as numerals though not as letters, [symbol] in the form of c=100,
[symbol] or m as 1000, and [symbol] or l as 50.

of these letters z fell out of use at an early period, its power being
expressed by s (_saguntum = zakunthos_) or ss (_massa = maza_). its
rejection was followed by the introduction, of g. plutarch ascribes this
change to sp. carvilius about 231 b.c., but it is found on inscriptions
nearly fifty years earlier. [4] in many words c was written for g down to
a late period, _e.g._ cn. was the recognised abbreviation for _gnaeus_.

in cicero's time z was taken into use again as well as the greek y, and
the greek combinations th, ph, ch, chiefly for purposes of
transliteration. the emperor claudius introduced three fresh symbols, two
of which appear more or less frequently on monuments of his time. they are
[symbol] or [symbol], the inverted digamma, intended to represent the
consonantal v: [symbol], or anti-sigma, to represent the greek _psi_, and
[symbol] to represent the greek _upsilon_ with the sound of the french _u_
or german _u_. the second is not found in inscriptions.

other innovations were the doubling of vowels to denote length, a device
employed by the oscans and introduced at rome by the poet accius, though
quintilian [5] implies that it was known before his time, and the doubling
of consonants which was adopted from, the greek by ennius. in greek,
however, such doubling generally, though not always, has a philological
justification. [6]

the pronounciation of latin has recently been the subject of much
discussion. it seems clear that the vowels did not differ greatly, if at
all, from the same as pronounced by the modern italians. the distinction
between e and i, however, was less clearly marked, at least in the popular
speech. inscriptions and manuscripts afford abundant instances of their
confusion. _menerva leber magester_ are mentioned by quintilian, [7] and
the employment of _ei_ for the _i_ of the dat. pl. of nouns of the second
declension and of _nobis vobis_, and of _e_ and _i_ indifferently for the
acc. pl. of nouns of the third declension, attest the similarity of sound.
that the spirant j was in all cases pronounced as y there is scarcely room
for doubt. the pronunciation of v is still undetermined, though there is a
great preponderance of evidence in favour of the w sound having been the
original one. after the first century a.d. this semi-vowel began to
develop into the labiodental consonant _v_, the intermediate stage being a
labial _v_, such as one may often hear in south germany at the present
day, and which to ordinary ears would seem undistinguishable from _w_.

there is little to remark about the other letters, except that s, n, and m
became very weak when final and were often entirely lost. s was
rehabilitated in the literary dialect in the time of cicero, who speaks of
the omission to reckon it as _subrusticum_; but final m is always elided
before a vowel. an illustration of the way in which final m and n were
weakened may be found in the nasalised pronunciation of them in modern
french (_main, faim_). the gutturals c and g have by some been supposed to
have had from the first a soft sibilant sound before e and i; but from the
silence of all the grammarians on the subject, from the transcriptions of
c in greek by _kappa_, not _sigma_ or _tau_, and from the inscriptions and
mss. of the best ages not confusing ci with ti, we conclude that at any
rate until 200 a.d. c and g were sounded hard before all vowels. the
change operated quickly enough afterwards, and to a great extent through
the influence of the umbrian which had used _d_ or _c_ before e and i for
some time.

in spelling much irregularity prevailed, as must always be the case where
there is no sound etymological theory on which to base it. in the earliest
inscriptions we find many inconsistencies. the case-signs _m_, _d_, are
sometimes retained, sometimes lost. in the second scipionic epitaph we
have _oino (unum)_ side by side with _luciom_. in the _columna rostrata_
(260 b.c.) we have _c_ for _g_, single instead of double consonants, _et_
for _it_ in _ornavet_, and _o_ for _u_ in terminations, all marks of
ancient spelling, contrasted with _maximos, maxumos; navebos, navebous;
praeda_, and other inconsistent or modern forms. perhaps a later
restoration may account for these. in the decree of aemilius, _posedisent_
and _possidere_ are found. in the _lex agraria_ we have _pequnia_ and
_pecunia_, in _s. c. de bacchanalibus, senatuos_ and _nominus_ (gen.
sing.), _consoluerunt_ and _cosoleretur_, &c., showing that even in legal
documents orthography was not fixed. it is the same in the mss. of ancient
authors. the oldest mss. of plautus, lucretius, and virgil, are consistent
in a considerable number of forms with themselves and with each other, but
vary in a still larger number. in antiquity, as at present, there was a
conflict between sound and etymology. a word was pronounced in one way;
science suggested that it ought to be written in another. this accounts
for such variations as _inperium, imperium; atque, adque; exspecto,
expecto;_ and the like (cases like _haud, haut; saxum, saxsum;_ are
different). the best writers could not decide between these conflicting
forms. a still greater fluctuation existed in english spelling in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, [8] but it has since been overcome.
great writers sometimes introduced spellings of their own. caesar wrote
_pompeiii_ (gen. sing.) for _pompeii_, after the oscan manner. he also
brought the superlative _simus_ into use. augustus, following in his
steps, paid great attention to orthography. his inscriptions are a
valuable source of evidence for ascertaining the correctest spelling of
the time. during and after the time of claudius affected archaisms crept
in, and the value both of inscriptions and mss. is impaired, on the one
hand, by the pedantic endeavour to bring spelling into accord with archaic
use or etymology, and, on the other, by the increasing frequency of
debased and provincial forms, which find place even in authoritative
documents. in spite of the obscurity of the subject several principles of
orthography have been definitely established, especially with regard to
the older latin, which will guide future editors. and the labours of
ritschl, corssen, and many others, cannot fail to bring to light the most
important laws of variability which have affected the spelling of latin
words, so far as the variation has not depended on mere caprice. [9]

with these preliminary remarks we may turn to the chief monuments of the
old language, the difficulties and uncertainties of which have been
greatly diminished by recent research. they are partly inscriptions (for
the oldest period exclusively so), and partly public documents, preserved
in the pages of antiquarians. much may be learnt from the study of coins,
which, though less ancient than some of the written literature, are often
more archaic in their forms. the earliest of the existing remains is the
song of the arval brothers, an old rustic priesthood (_qui sacra publica
faciunt propterea ut fruges ferant arva_), [10] dating from the times of
the kings. this fragment was discovered at rome in 1778, on a tablet
containing the acts of the sacred college, and was supposed to be as
ancient as romulus. the priesthood was a highly honourable office, its
members were chosen for life, and emperors are mentioned among them. the
yearly festival took place in may, when the fruits were ripe, and
consisted in a kind of blessing of the first-fruits. the minute and
primitive ritual was evidently preserved from very ancient times, and the
hymn, though it has suffered in transliteration, is a good specimen of
early roman worship, the rubrical directions to the brethren being
inseparably united with the invocation to the lares and mars. according to
mommsen's division of the lines, the words are--

  enos, lases, iuvate, (_ter_)
  neve lue rue, marmar, sins (v. sers) incurrere in pleores. (_ter_)
  satur fu, fere mars. limen sali. sta. berber. (_ter_)
  semunis alternei advocapit conctos. (_ter_)
  enos, marmor, iuvato. (_ter_)
  triumpe. (_quinquies_)

the great difference between this rude dialect and classical latin is
easily seen, and we can well imagine that this and the salian hymn of numa
were all but unintelligible to those who recited them. [11] the most
probable rendering is as follows:--"help us, o lares! and thou, marmar,
suffer not plague and ruin to attack our folk. be satiate, o fierce mars!
leap over the threshold. halt! now beat the ground. call in alternate
strain upon all the heroes. help us, marmor. bound high in solemn
measure." each line was repeated thrice, the last word five times.

as regards the separate words, _enos_, which should perhaps be written _e
nos_, contains the interjectional _e_, which elsewhere coalesces with
vocatives. [12] _lases_ is the older form of _lares_. _lue rue = luem
ruem_, the last an old word for _ruinam_, with the case-ending lost, as
frequently, and the copula omitted, as in _patres conscripti_, &c.
_marmar, marmor_, or _mamor_, is the reduplicated form of _mars_, seen in
the sabine _mamers_. _sins_ is for _sines_, as _advocapit_ for
_advocabitis_. [13] _pleores_ is an ancient form of _plures_, answering to
the greek _pleionas_ in form, and to _tous pollous_, "the mass of the
people" in meaning. _fu_ is a shortened imperative. [14] _berber_ is for
_verbere_, imper. of the old _verbero, is_, as _triumpe_ from _triumpere_
= _triumphare_. _semunes_ from _semo_ (_se-homo_ "apart from man") an
inferior deity, as we see from the sabine _semo sancus_ (= _dius fidius_).
much of this interpretation is conjectural, and other views have been
advanced with regard to nearly every word, but the above given is the most
probable.

the next fragment is from the salian hymn, quoted by varro. [15] it
appears to be incomplete. the words are:

    "cozeulodoizeso. omnia vero adpatula coemisse iamcusianes duo
    misceruses dun ianusve vet pos melios eum recum...," and a little
    further on, "divum empta cante, divum deo supplicante."

the most probable transcription is:

    "chorauloedus ero; omnia vero adpatula concepere iani curiones. bonus
    creator es. bonus janus vivit, quo meliorem regum [terra saturnia
    vidit nullum]"; and of the second, "deorum impetu canite, deorum deum
    suppliciter canite."

here we observe the ancient letter _z_ standing for _s_ and that for _r_,
also the word _cerus_ masc. of _ceres_, connected with the root _creare_.
_adpatula_ seems = _clara_. other quotations from the salian hymns occur
in festus and other late writers, but they are not considerable enough to
justify our dwelling upon them. all of them will be found in wordsworth's
_fragments and specimens of early latin_.

there are several fragments of laws said to belong to the regal period,
but they have been so modernised as to be of but slight value for the
purpose of philological illustration. one or two primitive forms, however,
remain. in a law of romulus, we read _si nurus ... plorassit ... sacra
divis parendum estod_, where the full form of the imperative occurs, the
only instance in the whole range of the language. [16] a somewhat similar
law, attributed to numa, contains some interesting forms:

  "si parentem puer verberit asi ole plorasit, puer divis parentum
                    verberat?    ille ploraverit    diis
  sacer esto."

much more interesting are the scanty remains of the laws of the twelve
tables (451, 450 b.c.). it is true we do not possess the text in its
original form. the great destruction of monuments by the gauls probably
extended to these important witnesses of national progress. livy, indeed,
tells us that they were recovered, but it was probably a copy that was
found, and not the original brass tables, since we never hear of these
latter being subsequently exhibited in the sight of the people. their
style is bold and often obscure, owing to the omission of distinctive
pronouns, though doubtless this obscurity would be greatly lessened if we
had the entire text. connecting particles are also frequently omitted, and
the interdependence of the moods is less developed than in any extant
literary latin. for instance, the imperative mood is used in all cases,
permissive as well as jussive, _si nolet arceram ne sternito_, "if he does
not choose, he need not procure a covered car." the subjunctive is never
used even in conditionals, but only in final clauses. those which seem to
be subjunctives are either present indicatives (_e.g. escit, vindicit_) or
second futures (_e.g. faxit, rupsit_.). the ablative absolute, so strongly
characteristic of classical latin, is never found, or only in one doubtful
instance. the word _igitur_ occurs frequently in the sense of "after
that," "in that case," a meaning which it has almost lost in the literary
dialect. some portion of each table is extant. we subjoin an extract from
the first.

  "1. si in ius vocat, ito. ni it, antestamino: igitur em capito. si calvitur
                                   antestetur   postea eum         frustratur

       pedemve struit, manum endo iacito
                             iniicito

  2. rem ubi pacunt orato. ni pacunt, in comitio aut in foro ante
             pagunt (cf. pacisci)
     meridiem caussam coiciunto. com peroranto ambo praesentes.
                                 una

  post meridiem praesenti litem addicito. si ambo praesentes, sol occasus
  suprema tempestas esto."

the difference between these fragments and the latin of plautus is really
inconsiderable. but we have the testimony of polybius [17] with regard to
a treaty between rome and carthage formed soon after the regifugium (509
b.c.), and therefore not much anterior to the decemvirs, that the most
learned romans could scarcely understand it. we should infer from this
that the language of the twelve tables, from being continually quoted to
meet the exigencies of public life, was unconsciously moulded into a form
intelligible to educated men; and that this process continued until the
time when literary activity commenced. after that it remained untouched;
and, in fact, the main portion of the laws as now preserved shows a strong
resemblance to the latin of the age of livius, who introduced the written
literature.

the next specimen will be the _columna rostrata_, or column of duillius.
the original monument was erected to commemorate his naval victory over
the carthaginians, 260 b.c., but that which at present exists is a
restoration of the time of claudius. it has, however, been somewhat
carelessly done, for several modernisms have crept into the language. but
these are not sufficient to disprove its claim to be a true restoration of
an ancient monument. to consider it a forgery is to disregard entirely the
judgment of quintilian, [18] who takes its genuineness for granted. it is
in places imperfect--

  "secestanosque ... opsidioned exemet, lecionesque cartaciniensis omnis
  maximosque macistratos luci palam post dies novem castreis exfociunt,
             magistratus                                     effugiunt
  macelamque opidom vi puenandod cepet. enque eodem macistratud bene
  rem navebos marid consol primos ceset, copiasque clasesque navales primos
                                  gessit
  ornavet paravetque. cumque eis navebous claseis poenicas omnis, item
  maxumas copias cartaciniensis, praesented hanibaled dictatored olorom,
                                                                 illorum
  inaltod marid puenandod vicet. vique navis cepet cum socieis septeresmom
  in alto                                                      septiremem
  unam, quinqueresmosque triresmosque naveis xxx: merset xiii. aurom
                                                  mersit
  captom numci [symbols] dcc. arcentom captom praeda: numci ccci[symbols]
  ccci[symbols]. omne captom, aes ccci[symbols] (plus vicies semel). primos
  quoque navaled praedad poplom donavet primosque cartaciniensis incenuos
                                                                 ingenuos
  duxit in triumpod."

we notice here c for g, et for it, o for v on the one hand: on the other,
_praeda_ where we should expect _praida_, besides the inconsistencies
alluded to on p. 13.

the mausoleum of the scipios containing the epitaphs was discovered in
1780. the first of these inscriptions dates from 280 b.c. or twenty years
earlier than the columna rostrata, and is the earliest original roman
philological antiquity of assignable date which we possess. but the other
epitaphs on the scipios advance to a later period, and it is convenient to
arrange them all together. the earliest runs thus:--

    "cornelius lucius, | scipio barbatus,
    gnaivod patre prognatus | fortis vir sapiensque,
    quoius forma virtu | tei parisuma fuit, [19]
    consol censor aidilis | quei fuit apud vos,
    taurasia cisauna | samnio cepit
    subigit omne loucanam | opsidesque abdoucit."

the next, the title of which is painted and the epitaph graven, refers to
the son of barbatus. like the preceding, it is written in saturnian verse:

  "honc oino ploirume co | sentiont romai
  duonoro optumo fu | ise viro viroro
  luciom scipione. | filios barbati
  consol censor aidilis | hic fuet apud vos
  hec cepit corsica 'aleri | aque urbe pugnandod,
  dedet tempestatebus | aide meretod votam."

the more archaic character of this inscription suggests the
explanation that the first was originally painted, and not engraven
till a later period, when, as in the case of the columna rostrata,
some of its archaisms (probably the more unintelligible) were
suppressed. in ordinary latin it would be:

    "hunc unum plurimi consentiunt romani (or romae) bonorum optimum
    fuisse virum virorum, lucium scipionem. filius (erat) barbati, consul,
    censor. aedilis hic fuit apud vos. hic cepit corsicam aleriamque urbem
    pugnando; dedit tempestatibus aedem merito votam."

the third epitaph is on p. corn. scipio, probably son of the great
africanus, and adopted father of scipio aemilianus:--

  "quei apice insigne dialis | flaminis gesistei
  mors perfecit tua ut essent | omnia brevia
  honos fama virtusque | gloria atque ingenium:
  quibus sei in longa licui | set tibi utier vita
  facile factis superasses | gloriam maiorum.
  quare lubens te in gremiu | scipio recipit
  terra, publi, prognatum | publio corneli."

the last which will be quoted here is that of l. corn. scipio, of
uncertain date:

  "magna sapientia mul | tasque virtutes
  aetate quom parva | possidet hoc saxsum,
  quoiei vita defecit | non honos honore.
  is hic situs, qui nunquam | victus ast virtutei.
  annos gnatus viginti | is diteist mandatus,
  ne quairatis honore | quei minus sit mandatus."

these last two are written in clear, intelligible latin, the former
showing in addition a genuine literary inspiration. nevertheless, the
student will perceive many signs of antiquity in the omission of the case-
ending _m_, in the spellings _gesistei, quom_ ( = _cum_. prep.) in the old
long quantities _omnia fama facile_ and the unique _quairatis_. there are
no less than five other inscriptions in the mausoleum, one of which
concludes with four elegiac lines, but they can hardly be cited with
justice among the memorials of the old language.

the _senatus consultum de bacchanalibus_, or, as some scholars prefer to
call it, _epistola consulum ad teuranos_ (186 b.c.), found at terra di
teriolo, in calabria, in 1640, is quite in its original state. it is
easily intelligible, and except in orthography, scarcely differs from
classical latin. we subjoin it entire, as it is a very complete and
important specimen of the language, and with it we shall close our list:--

"1. q. marcius l. f. s(p) postumius l. f. cos senatum consoluerunt n. oct-
 2. ob. apud aedem | duelonai. sc.       arf.      m. claudi(us) m. f.
                     bellonae  scribendo adfuerunt
    l. valeri(us) p.f.q. minuci(us) c. f.--
 3. de bacanalibus quei foideratei | esent ita exdeicendum censuere.
 4. neiquis eorum bacanal habuise velet. sei ques | esent quei
                                 vellet si  qui
    sibei deicerent necesus ese bacanal habere, eeis utei
 5. ad pr(aetorem) urbanum | romam venirent deque eeis rebus,
 6. ubei eorum verba audita esent, utei senatus | noster decerneret, dum ne
    minus senatorbus c adesent, quom ea
                       adessent
 7. res cosoleretur | bacas vir nequis adiese velet ceivis roma-
 8. nus neve nominus latini neve socium | quisquam, nisei
    pr(aetorem) urbanum adiesent, isque de senatuos sententiad,
                       adiissent
 9. dum ne | minus senatoribus c adesent, quom ea res cosoleretur, iousiset.
     censuere. |
10. sacerdos nequis vir eset. magister neque vir neque mulier
11. quisquam eset. | neve pecuniam quisquam eorum comoinem ha-
                                                  communem
12. buise velet, neve magistratum | neve pro magistratud, neque
13. virum neque mulierem quiquam fecise velet. | neve posthac inter sed
     coniourase
14. neve comvovise neve conspondise | neve compromesise velet, neve quis-
15. quam fidem inter sed dedise velet | sacra in oquoltod ne quisquam
                                                 occulto
16. fecise velet, neve in poplicod neve in | preivatod neve exstrad urbem
17. sacra quisquam fecise velet,--nisei | pr(aetorem) urbanum adieset isque
18. de senatuos sententiad, dum ne minus | senatoribus c adesent, uom es
        res cocoleretur, iousiset. censuere.
19. homines plous v oinversei virei atque mulieres sacra ne quisquam |
                    universi
20. fecise velet, neve inter ibei virei plous duobus mulieribus plous tri-
21. bus | arfuise velent, nisei de pr(aetoris) urbani senatuosque sententiad,
22. utei suprad | scriptam est.
23. haice utei in coventionid exdeicatis ne minus trinum | noundinum
                  contione
24. senatuosque sententiam utei scientes esetis--eorum | sententia ita fuit:
25. sei ques esent, quei arvorsum ead fecisent, quam suprad | scriptum
                         adversum ea
26. est, eeis rem caputalem faciendam censuere--atque utei | hoce in
27. tabolam abenam inceideretis, ita senatus aiquom censuit; | uteique eam
                                             aequum
28. figier ioubeatis ubei facilumed gnoscier potisit;--atque | utei ea ba-
29. canalia, sei qua sunt, exstrad quam sei quid ibei sacri est | ita utei
      suprad scriptum est, in diebus x. quibus vobis tabelai datai
30. erunt, | faciatis utci dismota sient--in agro teurano."
                                                  tauriano

we notice that there are in this decree no doubled consonants, no
ablatives without the final _d_ (except the two last words, which are
probably by a later hand), and few instances of _ae_ or _i_ for the older
_ai, ei; oi_ and _ou_ stand as a rule for _oe, u_; _ques, eeis_, for _qui,
ii_. on the other hand _us_ has taken the place of _os_ as the termination
of _romanus, postumius_, &c., and generally _u_ is put instead of the
older _o_. the peculiarities of latin syntax are here fully developed, and
the language has become what we call classical. at this point literature
commences, and a long succession of authors from plautus onwards carry the
history of the language to its completion; but it should be remembered
that few of these authors wrote in what was really the speech of the
people. in most cases a literature would be the best criterion of a
language. in latin it is otherwise. the popular speech could never have
risen to the complexity of the language of cicero and sallust. this was an
artificial tongue, based indeed on the colloquial idiom, but admitting
many elements borrowed from the greek. if we compare the language and
syntax of plautus, who was a genuine popular writer, with that of cicero
in his more difficult orations, the difference will at once be felt. and
after the natural development of classical latin was arrested (as it
already was in the time of augustus), the interval between the colloquial
and literary dialects became more and more wide. the speeches of cicero
could never have been unintelligible even to the lowest section of the
city crowd, but in the third and fourth centuries it is doubtful whether
the common people understood at all the artificially preserved dialect to
which literature still adhered. unfortunately our materials for tracing
the gradual decline of the spoken language are scanty. the researches of
mommsen, ritschl, and others, have added considerably to their number. and
from these we see that the old language of the early inscriptions was
subjected to a twofold process of growth. on the one hand, it expanded
into the literary dialect under the hands of the graecising aristocracy;
on the other, it ran its course as a popular idiom, little affected by the
higher culture for several centuries until, after the decay of classical
latin, it reappears in the fifth century, strikingly reminding us in many
points of the earliest infancy of the language. the _lingua plebeia,
vulgaris_, or _rustica_, corrupted by the gothic invasions, and by the
native languages of the other parts of the empire which it only partially
supplanted, became eventually distinguished from the _lingua latina_
(which was at length cultivated, even by the learned, only in writing,) by
the name of _lingua romana_. it accordingly differed in different
countries. the purest specimens of the old lingua romana are supposed to
exist in the mountains of sardinia and in the country of the grisons. in
these dialects many of the most ancient formations were preserved, which,
repudiated by the classical latin, have reappeared in the romance
languages, bearing testimony to the inherent vitality of native idiom,
even when left to work out its own development unaided by literature.


appendix.

_examples of the corrupted dialect of the fifth and following
centuries._ [20]

1. an epitaph of the fifth century.

  "hic requiescit in pace domna
                          domina

  bonusa quix ann.  xxxxxx et domo
         quae vixit          domino

  menna quixitannos ...   eabeat anatema  a juda si quis alterum
        qui vixit annos   habeat anathema

  omine   sup.  me posuerit. anatema abeas  da trecenti  decem et
  hominem super                      habeas de trecentis

  octo patriarche  qui chanones esposuerunt et da s ca    xpi
       patriarchis     canones  exposuerunt       sanctis christi

  quatuor eugvangelia"
          evangeliis

2. an instrument written in spain under the government of the moors in the
year 742, a fragment of which is taken from lanzi. the whole is given by
p. du mesnil in his work on the doctrine of the church.

  "non faciant suas missas misi
  portis cerratis: sin         peiter
  seratis              (minus) pendant

  decem pesantes argenti. monasterie  quae sunto in eo mando ... faciunt
        nummos            monasteriae                            faciant

  saracenis bona acolhensa sine vexatione neque forcia: vendant sine
            vectigalia?                         vi

  pecho tali pacto quod non vadant tributo foras de nostras terras."
                                                    nostris terris

3. the following is the oath of fealty taken by lewis, king of
germany, in 842 a.d.

  "pro deo amur  et pro christian  poble  et nostro comun   salvament
       dei amore        christiano populo    nostra communi salute

  dist    di  enavant  in quant
  de isto die in posterum quantum

  dis  saver et podirme dunat: si       salverat eo cist meon fradre karlo
  deus scire    posse   donet: sic (me) servet   ei isti meo  fratri carolo

  et in adjudha et in cadhuna     cosa   si  cum     om   per
        adjumento     qualicunque caussa sic quomodo homo per

  dreit          son fradra salvar  distino: quid il   mi      altre
  rectum (=jure) suo fratri salvare destine: quod ille mihi ex altera (parte)

  si  fazet; et abludher    nul    plaid     nunquam prendrai, qui
  sic faciet;   ab lothario nullum consilium unquam  accipiam, quod

  meon vol       cist meon fradra karlo  in damno sit."
  mea  voluntate isti meo  fratri carolo   damnum




chapter ii.

on the beginnings of roman literature.


mommsen has truly remarked that the culminating point of roman development
was the period which had no literature. had the roman people continued to
move in the same lines as they did before coming in contact with the works
of greek genius, it is possible that they might have long remained without
a literature. or if they had wrought one out for themselves, it would no
doubt have been very different from that which has come down to us. as it
is, roman literature forms a feature in human history quite without a
parallel. we see a nation rich in patriotic feeling, in heroes legendary
and historical, advancing step by step to the fullest solution then known
to the world of the great problems of law and government, and finally
rising by its virtues to the proud position of mistress of the nations,
which yet had never found nor, apparently, even wanted, any intellectual
expression of its life and growth, whether in the poet's inspired song or
in the sober narrative of the historian.

the cause of this striking deficiency is to be sought in the original
characteristics of the latin race. the latin character, as distinguished
from the greek, was eminently practical and unimaginative. it was marked
by good sense, not by luxuriant fancy: it was "natum rebus agendis." the
acute intellect of the romans, directing itself from the first to
questions of war and politics, obtained such a clear and comprehensive
grasp of legal and political rights as, united with an unwavering tenacity
of purpose, made them able to administer with profound intelligence their
vast and heterogeneous empire. but in the meantime reflective thought had
received no impulse.

the stern and somewhat narrow training which was the inheritance of the
governing class necessarily confined their minds to the hard realities of
life. whatever poetical capacity the romans may once have had was thus
effectually checked. those aspirations after an ideal beauty which most
nations that have become great have embodied in "immortal verse"--if they
ever existed in rome--faded away before her greatness reached its
meridian, only to be rekindled into a shadowy and reflected brightness
when rome herself had begun to decay.

there is nothing that so powerfully influences literature as the national
religion. poetry, with which in all ages literature begins, owes its
impulse to the creations of the religious imagination. such at least has
been the case with those aryan races who have been most largely endowed
with the poetical gift. the religion of the roman differed from that of
the greek in having no background of mythological fiction. for him there
was no olympus with its half-human denizens, no nymph-haunted fountain, no
deified heroes, no lore of sacred bard to raise his thoughts into the
realm of the ideal. his religion was cold and formal. consisting partly of
minute and tedious ceremonies, partly of transparent allegories whereby
the abstractions of daily life were clothed with the names of gods, it
possessed no power over his inner being. conceptions such as sowing
(saturnus), war (bellona), boundary (terminus), faithfulness (fides), much
as they might influence the moral and social feelings, could not be
expanded into material for poetical inventions. and these and similar
deities were the objects of his deepest reverence. the few traces that
remained of the ancient nature-worship, unrelated to one another, lost
their power of producing mythology. the capitoline jupiter never stood to
the romans in a true personal relation. neither mars nor hercules (who
were genuine italian gods) was to rome what apollo was to greece. whatever
poetic sentiment was felt centred rather in the city herself than in the
deities who guarded her. rome was the one name that roused enthusiasm;
from first to last she was the true supreme deity, and her material
aggrandisement was the never-exhausted theme of literary, as it had been
the consistent goal of practical, effort.

the primitive culture of latium, in spite of all that has been written
about it, is still so little known, that it is hard to say whether there
existed elements out of which a native art and literature might have been
matured. but it is the opinion of the highest authorities that such
elements did exist, though they never bore fruit. the yearly roman
festival with its solemn dance, [1] the masquerades in the popular
carnival, [2] and the primitive litanies, afforded a basis for poetical
growth almost identical with that which bore such rich fruit in greece. it
has been remarked that dancing formed a more important part of these
ceremonies than song. this must originally have been the case in greece
also, as it is still in all primitive stages of culture. but whereas in
greece the artistic cultivation of the body preceded and led up to the
higher conceptions of pure art, in rome the neglect of the former may have
had some influence in repressing the existence of the latter.

if the romans had the germ of dramatic art in their yearly festivals, they
had the germ of the epos in their lays upon distinguished warriors. but
the heroic ballad never assumed the lofty proportions of its sister in
greece. given up to women and boys it abdicated its claim to widespread
influence, and remained as it had begun, strictly "gentile." the theory
that in a complete state place should be found for the thinker and the
poet as well as for the warrior and legislator, was unknown to ancient
rome. her whole development was based on the negation of this theory. it
was only when she could no longer enforce her own ideal that she admitted
under the strongest protest the dignity of the intellectual calling. this
will partly account for her singular indifference to historical study.
with many qualifications for founding a great and original historical
school, with continuous written records from an early date, with that
personal experience of affairs without which the highest form of history
cannot be written, the romans yet allowed the golden opportunity to pass
unused, and at last accepted a false conception of history from the
contemporary greeks, which irreparably injured the value of their greatest
historical monuments. had it been customary for the sober-minded men who
contributed to make roman history for more than three centuries, to leave
simple commentaries for the instruction of after generations, the result
would have been of incalculable value. for that such men were well
qualified to give an exact account of facts is beyond doubt. but the
exclusive importance attached to active life made them indifferent to such
memorials, and they were content with the barren and meagre notices of the
pontifical annals and the yearly registers of magistrates in the temple of
capitoline jupiter.

these chronicles and registers on the one hand, and the hymns, laws, [3]
and formulas of various kinds on the other, formed the only written
literature existing in the times before the punic wars. besides these,
there, were a few speeches, such as that of ap. claudius caecus (280 b.c.)
against pyrrhus, published, and it is probable that the funeral orations
of the great families were transmitted either orally or in writing from
one generation to another, so as to serve both as materials for history
and models of style.

much importance has been assigned by niebuhr and others to the ballad
literature that clustered round the great names of roman history. it is
supposed to have formed a body of national poetry, the complete loss of
which is explained by the success of the anti-national school of ennius
which superseded it. the subjects of this poetry were the patriots and
heroes of old rome, and the traditions of the republic and the struggles
between the orders were faithfully reflected in it. macaulay's _lays of
ancient rome_ are a brilliant reconstruction of what he conceived to be
the spirit of this early literature. it was written, its supporters
contend, in the native saturnian, and, while strongly leavened with greek
ideas, was in no way copied from greek models. it was not committed to
writing, but lived in the memory of the people, and may still be found
embedded in the beautiful legends which adorn the earlier books of livy.
some idea of its scope may be formed from the fragments that remain of
naevius, who was the last of the old bards, and bewailed at his own death
the extinction of roman poetry. select lays were sung at banquets either
by youths of noble blood, or by the family bard; and if we possessed these
lays, we should probably find in them a fresher and more genuine
inspiration than in all the literature which followed.

this hypothesis of an early roman epos analogous to the homeric poems, but
preserved in a less coherent shape, has met with a close investigation at
the hands of scholars, but is almost universally regarded as "not proven."
the scanty and obscure notices of the early poetry by no means warrant our
drawing so wide an inference as the niebuhrian theory demands. [4] all
they prove is that the roman aristocracy, like that of all other warlike
peoples, listened to the praises of their class recited by minstrels
during their banquets or festive assemblies. but so far from the minstrel
being held in honour as in greece and among the scandinavian tribes, we
are expressly told that he was in bad repute, being regarded as little
better than a vagabond. [5] furthermore, if these lays had possessed any
merit, they would hardly have sunk into such complete oblivion among a
people so conservative of all that was ancient. in the time of horace
naevius was as well known as if he had been a modern; if, therefore, he
was merely one, though, the most illustrious, of a long series of bards,
it is inconceivable that his predecessors should have been absolutely
unknown. cicero, indeed, regrets the loss of these rude lays; but it is in
the character of an antiquarian and a patriot that he speaks, and not of
an appraiser of literary merit. the really imaginative and poetical halo
which invests the early legends of rome must not be attributed to
individual genius, but partly to patriotic impulse working among a people
for whom their city and her faithful defenders supplied the one material
for thought, and partly, no doubt, though we know not in what degree, to
early contact with the legends and culture of greece. the epitaphs of the
first two scipios are a good criterion of the state of literary
acquirement at the time. they are apparently uninfluenced by greek models,
and certainly do not present a high standard either of poetical thought or
expression.

the fact, also, that the romans possessed no native term for a poet is
highly significant. _poeta_, which we find as early as naevius, [6] is
greek; and _vates_, which zeuss [7] traces to a celtic root, meant
originally "soothsayer," not "poet." [8] only in the augustan period does
it come into prominence as the nobler term, denoting that inspiration
which is the gift of heaven and forms the peculiar privilege of genius.
[9] the names current among the ancient romans, _librarius_, _scriba_,
were of a far less complimentary nature, and referred merely to the
mechanical side of the art. [10] these considerations all tend to the
conclusion that the true point from which to date the beginning of roman
literature is that assigned by horace, [11] viz. the interval between the
first and second punic wars. it was then that the romans first had leisure
to contemplate the marvellous results of greek culture, revealed to them
by the capture of tarentum (272 b.c.), and still more conspicuously by the
annexation of sicily in the war with carthage. in sicily, even more than
in magna graecia, poetry and the arts had a splendid and enduring life.
the long line of philosophers, dramatists, and historians was hardly yet
extinct. theocritus was still teaching his countrymen the new poetry of
rustic life, and many of the inhabitants of the conquered provinces came
to reside at rome, and imported their arts and cultivation; and from this
period the history of roman poetry assumes a regular and connected form.
[12]

besides the scanty traces of written memorials, there were various
elements in roman civilisation which received a speedy development in the
direction of literature and science as soon as greek influence was brought
to bear on them. these may be divided into three classes, viz. rudimentary
dramatic performances, public speaking in the senate and forum, and the
study of jurisprudence.

the capacity of the italian nations for the drama is attested by the fact
that three kinds of dramatic composition were cultivated in rome, and if
we add to these the semi-dramatic _fescenninae_, we shall complete the
list of that department of literature. this very primitive type of song
took its rise in etruria; it derives its name from fescennium, an etrurian
town, though others connect it with _fascinum_, as if originally it were
an attempt to avert the evil eye. [13] horace traces the history of this
rude banter from its source in the harvest field to its city developments
of slander and abuse, [14] which needed the restraint of the law. livy, in
his sketch of the rise of roman drama, [15] alludes to these verses as
altogether unpolished, and for the most part extemporaneous. he agrees
with horace in describing them as taking the form of dialogue
(_alternis_), but his account is meagre in the extreme. in process of time
the fescennines seem to have modified both their form and character. from
being in alternate strains, they admitted a treatment as if uttered by a
single speaker,--so at least we should infer from macrobius's notice of
the fescennines sent by augustus to pollio, [16] which were either lines
of extempore raillery, or short biting epigrams, like that of catullus on
vatinius, [17] owing their title to the name solely to the pungency of
their contents. in a general way they were restricted to weddings, and we
have in the first _epithalamium_ of catullus, [18] and some poems by
claudian, highly-refined specimens of this class of composition. the
fescennines owed their popularity to the light-hearted temper of the old
italians, and to a readiness at repartee which is still conspicuous at the
present day in many parts of italy.

with more of the dramatic element than the fescennines, the _saturae_
appear to have early found a footing in rome, though their history is
difficult to trace. we gather from livy [19] that they were acted on the
stage as early as 359 b.c. before this the boards had been occupied by
etruscan dancers, and possibly, though not certainly, by improvisers of
fescennine buffooneries; but soon after this date _saturae_ were performed
by one or more actors to the accompaniment of the flute. the actors, it
appears, sang as well as gesticulated, until the time of livius, who set
apart a singer for the interludes, while he himself only used his voice in
the dialogue. the unrestrained and merry character of the _saturae_ fitted
them for the after-pieces, which broke up the day's proceedings
(_exodium_); but in later times, when tragedies were performed, this
position was generally taken by the _atellana_ or the _mime_. the name
_satura_ (or _satira_) is from _lanx saturu_, the medley or hodge-podge,
"quae referta variis multisque primitiis in sacro apud priscos diis
inferebatur." mommsen supposes it to have been the "masque of the full
men" (_saturi_), enacted at a popular festival, while others have
connected it with the greek satyric drama. in its dramatic form it
disappears early from history, and assumes with ennius a different
character, which has clung to it ever since.

besides these we have to notice the _mime_ and the _atellanae_. the former
corresponds roughly with our farce, though the pantomimic element is also
present, and in the most recent period gained the ascendancy. its true
latin name is _planipes_ (so juvenal _planipedes audit fabios_ [20] in
allusion to the actor's entering the stage barefoot, no doubt for the
better exhibition of his agility). mimes must have existed from very
remote times in italy, but they did not come into prominence until the
later days of the republic, when laberius and syrus cultivated them with
marked success. we therefore defer noticing them until our account of
that period.

there still remain the _fabulae atellanae_, so called from atella, an
oscan town of campania, and often mentioned as _osci ludi_. these were
more honourable than the other kinds, inasmuch as they were performed by
the young nobles, wearing masks, and giving the reins to their power of
improvisation. teuffel (l. l. s 9) considers the subjects to have been
"comic descriptions of life in small towns, in which the chief personages
gradually assumed a fixed character." in the period of which we are now
treating, _i.e._ before the time of a written literature, they were
exclusively in the hands of free-born citizens, and, to use livy's
expression, were not allowed to be polluted by professional actors. but
this hindered their progress, and it was not until several centuries after
their introduction, viz., in the time of sulla, that they received
literary treatment. they adopted the dialect of the common people, and
were more or less popular in their character. more details will be given
when we examine them in their completer form. all such parts of these
early scenic entertainments as were not mere conversation or ribaldry,
were probably composed in the saturnian metre.

this ancient rhythm, the only one indigenous to italy, presents some
points worthy of discussion. the original application of the name is not
agreed upon. thompson says, "the term saturnius seems to have possessed
two distinct applications. in both of these, however, it simply meant 'as
old as the days of saturn,' and, like the greek _ogugios_, was a kind of
proverbial expression for something antiquated. hence (1) the rude
rhythmical effusions, which contained the early roman story, might be
called saturnian, not with reference to their metrical law, but to their
_antiquity_; and (2) the term _saturnius_ was also applied to a definite
measure on the principles of greek prosody, though rudely and loosely
moulded--the measure employed by naevius, which soon became _antiquated_,
when ennius introduced the hexameter--and which is the _metrum saturnium_
recognised by the grammarians." [21] whether this measure was of italian
origin, as niebuhr and macaulay think, or was introduced from greece at an
early period, it never attained to anything like greek strictness of
metrical rules. to scan a line of livius or naevius, in the strict sense
of the word, is by no means an easy task, since there was not the same
constancy of usage with regard to quantity as prevailed after ennius, and
the relative prominence of syllables was determined by accent, either
natural or metrical. by natural accent is meant the higher or lower pitch
of the voice, which rests on a particular syllable of each word _e.g.
lucius_; by metrical accent the _ictus_ or beat of the verse, which in the
greek rhythms implies a long _quantity_, but in the saturnian measure has
nothing to do with quantity. the principle underlying the structure of the
measure is as follows. it is a succession of trochaic beats, six in all,
preceded by a single syllable, as in the instance quoted by
macaulay:

  "the | queen was in her chamber eating bread and honey,"

so in the scipionic epitaph,

  "qui | bus si in longa licuiset tibi utier vita."

these are, doubtless, the purest form of the measure. in these there is no
break, but an even continuous flow of trochaic rhythm. but even in the
earliest examples of saturnians there is a very strong tendency to form a
break by making the third trochaic beat close a word, _e.g._

  "cor | nelius lucius || scipio barbatus,"

and this structure prevailed, so that in the fragments of livius and
naevius by far the greater number exhibit it.

when greek patterns of versification were introduced, the saturnian rhythm
seems to have received a different explanation. it was considered as a
compound of the iambic and trochaic systems. it might be described as an
_iambic hepthemimer_ followed by a _trochaic dimeter brachycatalectic_.
the latter portion was preserved with something like regularity, but the
former admitted many variations. the best example of this _graecised_
metre is the celebrated line--

  "dabunt malum metelli | naevio poetae."

if, however, we look into the existing fragments of naevius and livius,
and compare them with the scipionic epitaphs, we shall find that there is
no appreciable difference in the rhythm; that whatever theory grammarians
might adopt to explain it, the measure of these poets is the genuine
trochaic beat, so natural to a primitive people, [22] and only so far
elaborated as to have in most cases a pause after the first half of the
line. the idea that the metre had prosodiacal laws, which, nevertheless,
its greatest masters habitually violated, [23] is one that would never
have been maintained had not the desire to systematise all latin prosody
on a greek basis prevailed almost universally. the true theory of early
latin scansion is established beyond a doubt by the labours of ritschl in
regard to plautus. this great scholar shows that, whereas after ennius
classic poetry was based on quantity alone, before him accent had at least
as important a place; and, indeed, that in the determination of quantity,
the main results in many cases were produced by the influence of accent.

accent (gr. _prosodia_) implied that the pronunciation of the accented
syllable was on a higher or lower note than the rest of the word. it was
therefore a musical, not a quantitative symbol. the rules for its position
are briefly as follows. no words but monosyllables or contracted forms
have the accent on the last; dissyllables are therefore always accented on
the first, and polysyllables on the first or second, according as the
penultimate is short or long, _lucius, cecidi_. at the same time, old
latin was burdened with a vast number of suffixes with a long final vowel.
the result of the non-accentuation of the last syllable was a continual
tendency to slur over and so shorten these suffixes. and this tendency was
carried in later times to such an extent as to make the quantity of all
final vowels after a short syllable bearing the accent indifferent. there
were therefore two opposing considerations which met the poet in his
capacity of versifier. there was the desire to retain the accent of every-
day life, and so make his language easy and natural, and the desire to
conform to the true quantity, and so make it strictly correct. in the
early poets this struggle of opposing principles is clearly seen. many
apparent anomalies in versification are due to the influence of accent
over-riding quantity, and many again to the preservation of the original
quantity in spite of the accent. ennius harmonised with great skill the
claims of both, doing little more violence to the natural accent in his
elaborate system of quantity than was done by the saturnian and comic
poets with their fluctuating usage. [24]

to apply these results to the saturnian verses extant, let us select a few
examples:

  "gnaivod patre prognatus | fortis vir sapiensque."

_patre_ or _patred_ retains its length by position, _i.e._ its metrical
accent, against the natural accent _patre_. in the case of syllables on
which the _ictus_ does not fall the quantity and accent are indifferent.
they are always counted as short, two syllables may stand instead of one--

  per liquidum mare sudantes | ditem vexarant.

or the unaccented syllable may be altogether omitted, as in the second
half of the line--

  "ditem vexarant."

in a line of naevius--

  "runcus atque purpureus | filii terras."

we have in _purpureus_ an instance of accent dominating over quantity. but
the first two words, in which the _ictus_ is at variance with both accent
and quantity, show the loose character of the metre. an interesting table
is given by corssen proving that the variance between natural and metrical
accent is greater in the saturnian verses than in any others, and in
plautus than in subsequent poets, and in iambics than in trochaics. [25]
we should infer from these facts (1) that the trochaic metre was the one
most naturally suited to the latin language; (2) that the progress in
uniting quantity and accent, which went on in spite of the great
inferiority of the poets, proves that the early poets did not understand
the conditions of the problem which they had set before them. to follow
out this subject into detail would be out of place here. the main point
that concerns our present purpose is, that the great want of skill
displayed in the construction of the saturnian verse [26] shows the romans
to have been mere novices in the art of poetical composition.

the romans, as a people, possessed a peculiar talent for public speaking.
their active interest in political life, their youthful training and the
necessity of managing their own affairs at an age which in most countries
would be wholly engrossed with boyish sports, all combined to make
readiness of speech an almost universal acquirement. the weighty
earnestness (_gravitas_) peculiar to the national character was nowhere
more conspicuously displayed than in the impassioned and yet strictly
practical discussions of the senate. taught as boys to follow at their
father's side, whether in the forum, at the law courts, in the senate at a
great debate, or at home among his agricultural duties, they gained at an
early age an insight into public business and a patient aptitude for work,
combined with a power of manly and natural eloquence, which nothing but
such daily familiarity could have bestowed. in the earlier centuries of
rome the power of speaking was acquired solely by practice. eloquence was
not reduced to the rules of an art, far less studied through manuals of
rhetoric. the celebrated speech of appius claudius when, blind, aged, and
infirm, he was borne in a litter to the senate-house, and by his burning
words shamed the wavering fathers into an attitude worthy of their
country, was the greatest memorial of this unstudied native eloquence.
when greek letters were introduced, oratory, like everything else, was
profoundly influenced by them; and although it never, during the
republican period, lost its national character, yet too much of mere
display was undoubtedly mixed up with it, and the severe self-restraint of
the native school disappeared, or was caricatured by antiquarian
imitators. the great nurse of roman eloquence was freedom; when that was
lost, eloquence sank, and while that existed, the mere lack of technical
dexterity cannot have greatly abated from the real power of the speakers.

the subject which the romans wrought out for themselves with the least
assistance from greek thought, was jurisprudence. in this they surpassed
not only the greeks, but all nations ancient and modern. from the early
formulae, mostly of a religious character, which existed in the regal
period, until the publication of the decemviral code, conservatism and
progress went hand in hand. [27] after that epoch elementary legal
knowledge began to be diffused, though the interpretation of the twelve
tables was exclusively in the hands of the patricians. but the limitation
of the judicial power by the establishment of a fixed code, and the
obligation of the magistrate to decide according to the written letter,
naturally encouraged a keen study of the sources which in later times
expanded into the splendid developments of roman legal science. the first
institution of the table of _legis actiones_, attributed to appius
claudius (304 b.c.), must be considered as the commencement of judicial
knowledge proper. the _responsa prudentium_, at the giving of which
younger men were present as listeners, must have contributed to form a
legal habit of thought among the citizens, and prepared a vast mass of
material for the labours of the philosophic jurists of a later age.

but inasmuch as neither speeches nor legal decisions were generally
committed to writing, except in the bare form of registers, we do not find
that there was any growth of regular prose composition. the rule that
prose is posterior to poetry holds good in rome, in spite of the
essentially prosaic character of the people. it has been already said that
religious, legal, and other formulae were arranged in rhythmical fashion,
so as to be known by the name of _carmina_. and conformably to this we see
that the earliest composers of history, who are in point of time the first
prose writers of rome, did not write in latin at all, but in greek. the
history of latin prose begins with cato. he gave it that peculiar
colouring which it never afterwards entirely lost. having now completed
our preliminary remarks, we shall proceed to a more detailed account of
the earliest writers whose names or works have come down to us.




chapter iii.

the introduction of greek literature--livius and naevius (240-204 b.c.).


it is not easy for us to realise the effect produced on the romans by
their first acquaintance with greek civilisation. the debt incurred by
english theology, philosophy, and music, to germany, offers but a faint
parallel. if we add to this our obligations to italy for painting and
sculpture, to france for mathematical science, popular comedy, and the
culture of the _salon_, to the jews for finance, and to other nations for
those town amusements which we are so slow to invent for ourselves, we
shall still not have exhausted or even adequately illustrated the
multifarious influences shed on every department of roman life by the
newly transplanted genius of hellas. it was not that she merely lent an
impulse or gave a direction to elements already existing. she did this;
but she did far more. she kindled into life by her fruitful contact a
literature in prose and verse which flourished for centuries. she
completely undermined the general belief in the state religion,
substituting for it the fair creations of her finer fancy, or when she did
not substitute, blending the two faiths together with sympathetic skill;
she entwined herself round the earliest legends of italy, and so moulded
the historical aspirations of rome that the great patrician came to pride
himself on his own ancestral connection with greece, and the descent of
his founder from the race whom greece had conquered. her philosophers
ruled the speculations, as her artists determined the aesthetics, of all
roman amateurs. her physicians held for centuries the exclusive practice
of scientific medicine; while in music, singing, dancing, to say nothing
of the lighter or less reputable arts of ingratiation, her professors had
no rivals. the great field of education, after the break up of the ancient
system, was mainly in greek hands; while her literature and language were
so familiar to the educated roman that in his moments of intensest feeling
it was generally in some greek apophthegm that he expressed the passion
which moved him. [1]

it would, therefore, be scarcely too much to assert that in every field of
thought (except that of law, where rome remained strictly national) the
roman intellect was entirely under the ascendancy of the greek. there are,
of course, individual exceptions. men like cato, varro, and in a later age
perhaps juvenal, could understand and digest greek culture without thereby
losing their peculiarly roman ways of thought; but these patriots in
literature, while rewarded with the highest praise, did not exert a
proportionate influence on the development of the national mind. they
remained like comets moving in eccentric orbs outside the regular and
observed motion of the celestial system.

the strongly felt desire to know something about greek literature must
have produced within a few years a pioneer bold enough to make the
attempt, if the accident of a schoolmaster needing text-books in the
vernacular for his scholars had not brought it about. the man who thus
first clothed greek poetry in a latin dress, and who was always gratefully
remembered by the romans in spite of his sorry performance of the task,
was livius andronicus (285-204? b.c.), a greek from tarentum, brought to
rome 275 b.c., and made the slave probably of m. livius salinator. having
received his freedom, he set up a school, and for the benefit of his
pupils translated the odyssey into saturnian verse. a few fragments of
this version survive, but they are of no merit either from a poetical or a
scholastic point of view, being at once bald and incorrect. [2] cicero [3]
speaks slightingly of his poems, as also does horace, [4] from boyish
experience of their contents. it is curious that productions so immature
should have kept their position as text-books for near two centuries; the
fact shows how conservative the romans were in such matters.

livius also translated tragedies from the greek. we have the names of the
_achilles_, _aegisthus_, _ajax_, _andromeda_, _danae, _equus trojanus_,
_tereus_, _hermione_. in this sphere also he seems to have written from a
commendable motive, to supply the popular want of a legitimate drama. his
first play was represented in 240 b.c. he himself followed the custom,
universal in the early period, [5] of acting in his own dramas. in them he
reproduced some of the simpler greek metres, especially the trochaic; and
terentianus maurus [6] gives from the _ino_ specimens of a curious
experiment in metre, viz. the substitution of an iambus for a spondee in
the last foot of a hexameter. as memorials of the old language these
fragments present some interest; words like _perbitere (= perire),
anculabant ( =hauriebant), nefrendem (= infantem), dusmus (= dumosus)_,
disappeared long before the classical period.

his plodding industry and laudable aims obtained him the respect of the
people. he was not only selected by the pontifices to write the poem on
the victory of sena (207 b.c.), [7] but was the means of acquiring for the
class of poets a recognised position in the body corporate of the state.
his name was handed down to later times as the first awakener of literary
effort at rome, but he hardly deserves to be ranked among the body of
roman authors. the impulse which he had communicated rapidly bore fruit.
dramatic literature was proved to be popular, and a poet soon arose who
was fully capable of fixing its character in the lines which its after
successful cultivation mainly pursued. cn. naevius, (269?-204 b.c.) a
campanian of latin extraction and probably not a roman citizen, had in his
early manhood fought in the first punic war. [8] at its conclusion he came
to rome and applied himself to literary work. he seems to have brought out
his first play as early as 235 b.c. his work mainly consisted of
translations from the greek; he essayed both tragedy and comedy, but his
genius inclined him to prefer the latter. many of his comedies have latin
names, _dolus_, _figulus_, _nautae_, &c. these, however, were not
_togatae_ but _palliatae_, [9] treated after the same manner as those of
plautus, with greek costumes and surroundings. his original contribution
to the stage was the _praetexta_, or national historical drama, which
thenceforth established itself as a legitimate, though rarely practised,
branch of dramatic art. we have the names of two _praetextae_ by him,
_clastidium_ and _romulus_ or _alimonium romuli et remi_.

the style of his plays can only be roughly inferred from the few passages
which time has spared us. that it was masculine and vigorous is clear; we
should expect also to find from the remarks of horace as well as from his
great antiquity, considerable roughness. but on referring to the fragments
we do not observe this. on the contrary, the style both in tragedy and
comedy is simple, natural, and in good taste. it is certainly less
laboured than that of ennius, and though it lacks the racy flavour of
plautus, shows no inferiority to his in command of the resources of the
language. [10] on the whole, we are inclined to justify the people in
their admiration for him as a genuine exponent of the strong native humour
of his day, which the refined poets of a later age could not appreciate.

naevius did not only occupy himself with writing plays. he took a keen
interest in politics, and brought himself into trouble by the freedom with
which he lampooned some of the leading families. the metelli, especially,
were assailed by him, and it was probably through their resentment that he
was sent to prison, where he solaced himself by composing two comedies.
[11] plautus, who was more cautious, and is by some thought to have had
for naevius some of the jealousy of a rival craftsman, alludes to this
imprisonment [12]:--

  "nam os columnatum poetae esse indaudivi barbaro,
  quoi bini custodes semper totis horis accubant."

the poet, however, did not learn wisdom from experience. he lampooned the
great scipio in some spirited verses still extant, and doubtless made many
others feel the shafts of his ridicule. but the censorship of literary
opinion was very strict in rome, and when he again fell under it, he was
obliged to leave the city. he is said to have retired to utica, where he
spent the rest of his life and died (circ. 204 b.c.). it was probably
there that he wrote the poem which gives him the chief interest for us,
and the loss of which by the hand of time is deeply to be regretted.
debarred from the stage, he turned to his own military experience for a
subject, and chose the first punic war. he thus laid the foundation of the
class of poetry known as the "national epic," which received its final
development in the hands of virgil. the poem was written in saturnian
verse, perhaps from a patriotic motive; and was not divided into books
until a century after the poet's death, when the grammarian lampadio
arranged it in seven books, assigning two to the mythical relations of
rome and carthage, and the remainder to the history of the war. the
narrative seems to have been vivid, truthful, and free from exaggerations
of language. the legendary portion contained the story of aeneas's visit
to carthage, which virgil adopted, besides borrowing other single
incidents. what fragments remain are not very interesting and do not
enable us to pronounce any judgment. but cicero's epithet "_luculente_
scripsit" [13] is sufficient to show that he highly appreciated the poet's
powers; and the popularity which he obtained in his life-time and for
centuries after his death, attests his capacity of seizing the national
modes of thought. he had a high opinion of himself; he held himself to be
the champion of the old italian school as opposed to the graecising
innovators. his epitaph is very characteristic: [14]

  "mortales immortales si foret fas flere,
  flerent divae camenae naevium poetam.
  itaque postquamst orcino traditus thesauro
  obliti sunt romae loquier latina lingua."




chapter iv.

roman comedy--plautus to turpilius (254-103 b.c.).


before entering upon any criticism of the comic authors, it will be well
to make a few remarks on the general characteristics of the roman theatre.
theatrical structures at rome resembled on the whole those of greece, from
which they were derived at first through the medium of etruria, [1] but
afterwards directly from the great theatres which magna graecia possessed
in abundance. unlike the greek theatres, however, those at rome were of
wood not of stone, and were mere temporary erections, taken down
immediately after being used. on scaffoldings of this kind the plays of
plautus and terence were performed. even during the last period of the
republic, wooden theatres were set up, sometimes on a scale of profuse
expenditure little consistent with their duration. [2] an attempt was made
to build a permanent stone theatre, 135 b.c., but it was defeated by the
consul scipio nasica. [3]

the credit of building the first such edifice is due to pompey (55 b.c.),
who caused it to have accommodation for 40,000 spectators. vitruvius in
his fifth book explains the ground-plan of such buildings. they were
almost always on the same model, differing in material and size. on one
occasion two whole theatres of wood, placed back to back, were made to
turn on a pivot, and so being united, to form a single amphitheatre. [4]
in construction, the roman theatre differed from the greek in reserving an
arc not exceeding a semicircle for the spectators. the stage itself was
large and raised not more than five feet. but the orchestra, instead of
containing the chorus, was filled by senators, magistrates, and
distinguished guests. [5] this made it easier for the romans to dispense
with a chorus altogether, which we find, as a rule, they did. the rest of
the people sat or stood in the great semicircle behind that which formed
the orchestra. the order in which they placed themselves was not fixed by
law until the later years of the republic, and again, with additional
safeguards, in the reign of augustus. [6] but it is reasonable to suppose
that the rules of precedence were for the most part voluntarily observed.

it would appear that in the earliest theatres there were no tiers of seats
(_cunei_), but merely a semicircle of sloping soil, banked up for the
occasion (_cavea_) on which those who had brought seats sat down, while
the rest stood or reclined. the stage itself is called _pulpitum_ or
_proscaenium_, and the decorated background _scaena_. women and children
were allowed to be present from the earliest period; slaves were not, [7]
though it is probable that many came by the permission of their masters.
the position of poets and actors was anything but reputable. the manager
of the company was generally at best a freedman; and the remuneration
given by the aediles, if the piece was successful, was very small; if it
failed, even that was withheld. the behaviour of the audience was
certainly none of the best. accustomed at all times to the enjoyment of
the eye rather than the ear, the romans were always impatient of mere
dialogue. thus terence tells us that contemporary poets resorted to
various devices to produce some novel spectacle, and he feels it necessary
to explain why he himself furnishes nothing of the kind. fair criticism
could hardly be expected from so motley an assembly; hence terence begs
the people in each case to listen carefully to his play and then, and not
till then, if they disapprove, to hiss it off the stage. [8] in the times
of plautus and ennius the spectators were probably more discriminating;
but the steady depravation of the spectacles furnished for their amusement
contributed afterwards to brutalise them with fearful rapidity, until at
the close of the republican period dramatic exhibitions were thought
nothing of in comparison with a wild-beast fight or a gladiatorial show.

at first, however, comedy was decidedly a favourite with the people, and
for one tragic poet whose name has reached us there are at least five
comedians. of the three kinds of poetry cultivated in this early period,
comedy, which, according to quintilian [9] was the least successful, has
been much the most fortunate. for whereas we have to form our opinion of
roman tragedy chiefly from the testimony of ancient authors, we can
estimate the value of roman comedy from the ample remains of its two
greatest masters. the plays of plautus are the most important for this
purpose. independently of their greater talent, they give a truer picture
of roman manners, and reflect more accurately the popular taste and level
of culture. it is from them, therefore, that any general remarks on roman
comedy would naturally be illustrated.

comedy, being based on the fluctuating circumstances of real life, lends
itself more easily than tragedy to a change of form. hence, while tragic
art after once passing its prime slowly but steadily declines, comedy
seems endued with greater vitality, and when politics and religion are
closed to it, readily contents itself with the less ambitious sphere of
manners. thus, at athens, menander raised the new comedy to a celebrity
little if at all inferior to the old; while the form of art which he
created has retained its place in modern literature as perhaps the most
enduring which the drama has assumed. in rome there was far too little
liberty of speech for the aristophanic comedy to be possible. outspoken
attacks in public on the leading statesmen did not accord with the
senatorial idea of government. hence such poets as possessed a comic vein
were driven to the only style which could be cultivated with impunity,
viz. that of philemon and menander. but a difficulty met them at the
outset. the broad allusions and rough fun of aristophanes were much more
intelligible to a roman public than the refined criticism and quiet satire
of menander, even supposing the poet able to reproduce these. the author
who aspired to please the public had this problem before him,--while
taking the middle and new comedy of athens for his model, to adapt them to
the coarser requirements of roman taste and the national rather than
cosmopolitan feeling of a roman audience, without drawing down the wrath
of the government by imprudent political allusions.

it was the success with which plautus fulfilled these conditions that
makes him pre-eminently the comic poet of rome; and which, though purists
affected to depreciate him, [10] excited the admiration of such men as
cicero, [11] varro, and sisenna, and secured the uninterrupted
representation of his plays until the fourth century of
the empire.

the life of plautus, which extended from 254 to 184 b.c. presents little
of interest. his name used to be written m. accius, but is now, on the
authority of the ambrosian ms. changed to t. maccius plautus. he was by
birth an umbrian from sassina, of free parents, but poor. we are told by
gellius [12] that he made a small fortune by stage decorating, but lost it
by rash investment; he was then reduced to labouring for some years in a
corn mill, but having employed his spare time in writing, he established a
sufficient reputation to be able to devote the rest of his life to the
pursuit of his art. he did not, however, form a high conception of his
responsibility. the drudgery of manual labour and the hardships under
which he had begun his literary career were unfavourable to the finer
susceptibilities of an enthusiastic nature. so long as the spectators
applauded he was satisfied. he was a prolific writer; 130 plays are
attributed to him, but their genuineness was the subject of discussion
from a very early period. varro finally decided in favour of only 21, to
which he added 19 more as probably genuine, the rest he pronounced
uncertain. we may join him in regarding it as very probable that the plays
falsely attributed to plautus were productions of his own and the next
generation, which for business reasons the managers allowed to pass under
the title of "plautine." or, perhaps, plautus may have given a few touches
and the benefit of his great name to the plays of his less celebrated
contemporaries, much as the great italian painters used the services of
their pupils to multiply their own works.

of the 20 plays that we possess (the entire varronian list, except the
_vidularia_, which was lost in the middle ages) all have the same general
character, with the single exception of the _amphitruo_. this is more of a
burlesque than a comedy, and is full of humour. it is founded on the well-
worn fable of jupiter and alcmena, and has been imitated by moliere and
dryden. its source is uncertain; but it is probably from archippus, a
writer of the old comedy (415 b.c.). its form suggests rather a
development of the satyric drama.

the remaining plays are based on real life; the real life that is
pourtrayed by menander, and by no means yet established in rome, though
soon to take root there with far more disastrous consequences the life of
imbecile fathers made only to be duped, and spendthrift sons; of jealous
husbands, and dull wives; of witty, cunning, and wholly unscrupulous
slaves; of parasites, lost to all self-respect; of traffickers in vice of
both sexes, sometimes cringing, sometimes threatening, but almost always
outwitted by a duplicity superior to their own; of members of the _demi-
monde_, whose beauty is only equalled by their shameless venality, though
some of them enlist our sympathies by constancy in love, others by
unmerited sufferings (which, however, always end happily); and, finally,
of an array of cooks, go-betweens, confidantes, and nondescripts, who will
do any thing for a dinner--a life, in short, that suggests a gloomy idea
of the state into which the once manly and high-minded athenians had sunk.

it may, however, be questioned whether plautus did not exceed his models
in licentiousness, as he certainly fell below them in elegance. the drama
has always been found to exercise a decided influence on public morals;
and at rome, where there was no authoritative teaching on the subject, and
no independent investigation of the foundations of moral truth, a series
of brilliant plays, in which life was regarded as at best a dull affair,
rendered tolerable by coarse pleasures, practical jokes, and gossip, and
then only as long as the power of enjoyment lasts, can have had no good
effect on the susceptible minds of the audience. the want of respect for
age, again, so alien to old roman feeling, was an element imported from
the greeks, to whom at all times the contemplation of old age presented
the gloomiest associations. but it must have struck at the root of all
roman traditions to represent the aged father in any but a venerable
light; and inimitable as plautus is as a humourist, we cannot regard him
as one who either elevates his own art, or in any way represents the
nobler aspect of the roman mind.

the conventional refinement with which menander invested his characters,
and which was so happily reproduced by terence, was not attempted by
plautus. his excellence lies rather in the bold and natural flow of his
dialogue, fuller, perhaps, of spicy humour and broad fun than of wit, but
of humour and fun so lighthearted and spontaneous that the soberest reader
is carried away by it. in the construction of his plots he shows no great
originality, though often much ingenuity. sometimes they are adopted
without change, as that of the _trinummus_ from the _thaesauros_ of
philemon; sometimes they are patched together [13] from two or more greek
plays, as is probably the case with the _epidicus_ and _captivi_;
sometimes they are so slight as to amount to little more than a peg on
which to hang the witty speeches of the dialogue, as, for example, those
of the _persa_ and _curculio_.

the _menaechmi_ and _trinummus_ are the best known of his plays; the
former would be hard to parallel for effective humour: the point on which
the plot turns, viz. the resemblance between two pairs of brothers, which
causes one to be mistaken for the other, and so leads to many ludicrous
scenes, is familiar to all readers of shakespeare from the _comedy of
errors_. of those plays which border on the sentimental the best is the
_captivi_, which the poet himself recommends to the audience on the score
of its good moral lesson, adding with truth--

  "huiusmodi paucas poetae reperiunt comoedias
  ubi boni meliores fiant."

we are told [14] that plautus took the greatest pleasure in his
_pseudolus_, which was also the work of his old age. the _epidicus_ also
must have been a favourite with him. there is an allusion to it in the
_bacchides_, [15] which shows that authors then were as much distressed by
the incapacity of the actors as they are now.

  "non herus sed actor mihi cor odio sauciat.
  etiam epidicum quam ego fabulum aeque ac me ipsum amo
  nullam aeque invitus specto, si agit pellio."

the prologues prefixed to nearly all the plays are interesting from their
fidelity to the greek custom, whereas those of terence are more personal,
and so resemble the modern prologue. in the former we see the arch
insinuating pleasantry of plautus employed for the purpose of ingratiating
himself with the spectators, a result which, we may be sure, he finds
little difficulty in achieving. among the other plays, the _poenulus_
possesses for the philologist this special attraction, that it contains a
phoenician passage, which, though rather carelessly transliterated, is the
longest fragment we possess of that important semitic language. [16] all
the plautine plays belong to the _palliatae_, i.e. those of which the
entire surroundings are greek, the name being taken from the _pallium_ or
greek cloak worn by the actors. there was, however, in the italian towns a
species of comedy founded on greek models but national in dress, manners,
and tone, known as _comoedia togata_, of which titinius was the greatest
master. the _amphitruo_ is somewhat difficult to class; if, as has been
suggested above, it be assigned to the old comedy, it will be a
_palliata_. if, as others think, it be rather a specimen of the _hilaro-
tragodia_ [17] or _rhinthonica_ (so called from rhinthon of tarentum), it
would form the only existing specimen of another class, called by the
greeks _italikae komodia_. horace speaks of plautus as a follower of
epicharmus, and his plots were frequently taken from mythological
subjects. with regard, however, to the other plays of plautus, as well as
those of caecilius, trabea, licinius imbrex, luscius lavinius, terence and
turpilius, there is no ground for supposing that they departed from the
regular treatment of palliatae. [18]

plautus is a complete master of the latin language in its more colloquial
forms. whatever he wishes to say he finds no difficulty in expressing
without the least shadow of obscurity. his full, flowing style, his
inexhaustible wealth of words, the pliancy which in his skilful hands is
given to the comparatively rude instrument with which he works, are
remarkable in the highest degree. in the invention of new words, and the
fertility of his combinations, [19] he reminds us of shakespeare, and far
exceeds any other latin author. but perhaps this faculty is not so much
absent from subsequent writers as kept in check by them. they felt that
latin gained more by terse arrangement and exact fitness in the choice of
existing terms, than by coining new ones after the greek manner. plautus
represents a tendency, which, after him, steadily declines; lucretius is
more sparing of new compounds than ennius, virgil than lucretius, and
after virgil the age of creating them had ceased.

it must strike every reader of plautus, as worthy of note, that he assumes
a certain knowledge of the greek tongue on the part of his audience. not
only are many (chiefly commercial) terms directly imported from the greek,
as _dica_, _tarpessita_, _logi_, _sycophantia_, _agoranomus_, but a large
number of greek adjectives and adverbs are used, which it is impossible to
suppose formed part of the general speech--e.g. _thalassicus_, _euscheme_,
_dulice_, _dapsilis_: greek puns are introduced, as "_opus est chryso
chrysalo_" in the _bacchides_; and in the _persa_ we have the following
hybrid title of a supposed persian grandee, "_vaniloquidorus
virginisvendonides nugipolyloquides argentiexterebronides tedigniloquides
nummorumexpalpouides quodsemelarripides nunquamposteareddides_!"

nevertheless, plautus never uses greek words in the way so justly
condemned by horace, viz. to avoid the trouble of thinking out the proper
latin equivalent. he is as free from this bad habit as cato himself: all
his graecisms, when not technical terms, have some humourous point; and,
as far as we can judge, the good example set by him was followed by all
his successors in the comic drama. their superiority in this respect may
be appreciated by comparing them with the extant fragments of lucilius.

in his metres he follows the greek systems, but somewhat loosely. his
iambics admit spondees, &c. into all places but the last; but some of his
plays show much more care than others: the _persa_ and _stichus_ being the
least accurate, the _menaechmi_ peculiarly smooth and harmonious. the
trochaic tetrameter and the cretic are also favourite rhythms; the former
is well suited to the latin language, its beat being much more easily
distinguishable in a rapid dialogue than that of the iambic. his metre is
regulated partly by quantity, partly by accent; but his quantities do not
vary as much as has been supposed. the irregularities consist chiefly of
neglect of the laws of position, of final long vowels, of inflexional
endings, and of double letters, which last, according to some grammarians,
were not used until the time of ennius. his lyric metres are few, and very
imperfectly elaborated. those which he prefers are the cretic and
bacchiac, though dactylic and choriambic systems are not wholly unknown.
his works form a most valuable storehouse of old latin words, idioms, and
inflexions; and now that the most ancient mss. have been scientifically
studied, the true spelling of these forms has been re-established, and
throws the greatest light on many important questions of philology. [20]

after plautus the most distinguished writer of comedy was statius
caecilius (219-166? b.c.), a native of insubria, brought as a prisoner to
rome, and subsequently (we know not exactly when) manumitted. he began
writing about 200 b.c., when plautus was at the height of his fame. he
was, doubtless, influenced (as indeed could not but be the case) by the
prestige of so great a master; but, as soon as he had formed his own
style, he seems to have carried out a treatment of the originals much more
nearly resembling that of terence. for while in plautus some of the oddest
incongruities arise from the continual intrusion of roman law-terms and
other everyday home associations into the athenian _agora_ or
_dicasteries_, in terence this effective but very inartistic source of
humour is altogether discarded, and the comic result gained solely by the
legitimate methods of incident, character, and dialogue. that this
stricter practice was inaugurated by caecilius is probable, both from the
praise bestowed on him in spite of his deficiency in purity of latin style
by cicero, [21] and also from the evident admiration felt for him by
terence. the prologue to the _hecyra_ proves (what we might have well
supposed) that the earlier plays of such a poet had a severe struggle to
achieve success. [22] the actor, ambivius turpio, a tried servant of the
public, maintains that his own perseverance had a great deal to do with
the final victory of caecilius; and he apologises for bringing forward a
play which had once been rejected, by his former success in similar
circumstances. horace implies that he maintained during the augustan age
the reputation of a dignified writer. [23] of the thirty-nine titles of
his plays, by far the larger number are greek, though a few are latin, or
exist in both languages. those of plautus and naevius, it will be
observed, are almost entirely latin. this practice of retaining the greek
title, indicating, as it probably does, a closer adherence to the greek
style, seems afterwards to have become the regular custom. in his later
years caecilius enjoyed great reputation, and seems to have been almost
dictator of the roman stage, if we may judge from the story given by
suetonius in his life of terence. one evening, he tells us, as caecilius
was at dinner, the young poet called on him, and begged for his opinion on
the _andria_, which he had just composed. unknown to fame and meanly
dressed, he was bidden to seat himself on a bench and read his work.
scarcely had he read a few verses, when caecilius, struck by the
excellence of the style, invited his visitor to join him at table; and
having listened to the rest of the play with admiration, at once
pronounced a verdict in his favour. this anecdote, whatever be its
pretensions to historical accuracy, represents, at all events, the
conception entertained of caecilius's position and influence as introducer
of dramatic poets to the roman public. the date of his death is uncertain:
he seems not to have attained any great age.

the judgment of caecilius on terence was ratified by the people. when the
_andria_ was first presented at the megalesian games (166 b.c.) it was
evident that a new epoch had arisen in roman art. the contempt displayed
in it for all popular methods of acquiring applause is scarcely less
wonderful than the formed style and mature view of life apparent in the
poet of twenty-one years.

it was received with favour, and though occasional failures afterwards
occurred, chiefly through the jealousy of a rival poet, the dramatic
career of terence may, nevertheless, be pronounced as brilliantly
successful as it was shortlived. his fame increased with each succeeding
play, till at the time of his early death, he found himself at the head of
his profession, and, in spite of petty rivalries, enjoying a reputation
almost equal to that of plautus himself.

the elegance and purity of his diction is the more remarkable as he was a
carthaginian by birth, and therefore spoke an idiom as diverse as can be
conceived from the latin in syntax, arrangement, and expression. he came
as a boy to rome, where he lived as the slave of the senator terentius
lucanus, by whom he was well educated and soon given his freedom. the best
known fact about him is his intimate friendship with scipio africanus the
younger, laelius, and furius, who were reported to have helped him in the
composition of his plays. this rumour the poet touches on with great
skill, neither admitting nor denying its truth, but handling it in such a
way as reflected no discredit on himself and could not fail to be
acceptable to the great men who were his patrons. [24] we learn from
suetonius that the belief strengthened with time. to us it appears most
improbable that anything important was contributed by these eminent men.
they might have given hints, and perhaps suggested occasional expressions,
but the temptation to bring their names forward seems sufficiently to
account for the lines in question, since the poet gained rather than lost
by so doing. it has, however, been supposed that scipio and his friends,
desiring to elevate the popular taste, really employed terence to effect
this for them, their own position as statesmen preventing their coming
forward in person as labourers in literature; and it is clear that terence
has a very different object before him from that of plautus. the latter
cares only to please; the former is not satisfied unless he instructs. and
he is conscious that this endeavour gains him undeserved obloquy. all his
prologues speak of bitter opposition, misrepresentation, and dislike; but
he refuses to lower his high conception of his art. the people must hear
his plays with attention, throw away their prejudices, and pronounce
impartially on his merits. [25] he has such confidence in his own view
that he does not doubt of the issue. it is only a question of time, and if
his contemporaries refuse to appreciate him, posterity will not fail to do
so. this confidence was fully justified. not only his friends but the
public amply recognised his genius; and if men like cicero, horace, and
caesar, do not grant him the highest creative power, they at least speak
with admiration of his cultivated taste. the criticism of cicero is as
discriminating as it is friendly: [26]

  "tu quoque, qui solus lecto sermone, terenti,
  conversum espressumque latina voce menandrum
  in medio populi sedatis vocibus effers;
  quidquid come loquens atque omnia dulcia dicens."

caesar, in a better known epigram, [27] is somewhat less complimentary,
but calls him _puri sermonis amator_ ("a well of english undefiled").
varro praises his commencement of the _andria_ above its original in
menander; and if this indicates national partisanship, it is at least a
testimony to the poet's posthumous fame.

the modern character of terence, as contrasted with plautus, is less
apparent in his language than in his sentiments. his latin is
substantially the same as that of plautus, though he makes immeasurably
fewer experiments with language. he never resorts to strange words,
uncouth compounds, puns, or graecisms for producing effect; [28] his
diction is smooth and chaste, and even indelicate subjects are alluded to
without any violation of the proprieties; indeed it is at first surprising
that with so few appeals to the humourous instinct and so little witty
dialogue, terence's comic style should have received from the first such
high commendation. the reason is to be found in the circumstances of the
time. the higher spirits at rome were beginning to comprehend the drift of
greek culture, its subtle mastery over the passions, its humanitarian
character, its subversive influence. the protest against traditional
exclusiveness begun by the great scipio, and powerfully enforced by
ennius, was continued in a less heroic but not less effective manner by
the younger scipio and his friends lucilius and terence. all the plays of
terence are written with a purpose; and the purpose is the same which
animated the political leaders of free thought. to base conduct upon
reason rather than tradition, and paternal authority upon kindness rather
than fear; [29] to give up the vain attempt to coerce youth into the
narrow path of age; to grapple with life as a whole by making the best of
each difficulty when it arises; to live in comfort by means of mutual
concession and not to plague ourselves with unnecessary troubles: such are
some of the principles indicated in those plays of menander which terence
so skilfully adapted, and whose lessons he set before a younger and more
vigorous people. the elucidation of these principles in the action of the
play, and the corresponding interchange of thought naturally awakened in
the dialogue and expressed with studied moderation, [30] form the charm of
the terentian drama. in the bolder elements of dramatic excellence it must
be pronounced deficient. there is not menander's many-sided knowledge of
the world, nor the racy drollery of plautus, nor the rich humour of
moliere, nor the sparkling wit of sheridan,--all is toned down with a
severe self-restraint, creditable to the poet's sense of propriety, but
injurious to comic effect. his characters also lack variety, though
powerfully conceived. they are easily classified; indeed, terence himself
summarises them in his prologue to the _eanuchus_, [31] and as a rule is
true to the distinctions there laid down. another defect is the great
similarity of names. there is a _chremes_ in four plays who stands for an
old man in three, for a youth in one; while the names _sostrata, sophrona,
bacchis, antipho, hegio, phaedria, davus_, and _dromo_, all occur in more
than one piece. thus we lose that close association of a name with a
character, which is a most important aid towards lively and definite
recollection. the characters become not so much individuals as
impersonations of social or domestic relationships, though drawn, it is
true, with a life-like touch. this defect, which is shared to a great
extent by plautus, is doubtless due to the imitative nature of latin
comedy. menander's characters were analysed and classified by the critics,
and the translator felt bound to keep to the main outlines of his model.
it is said that terence was not satisfied with his delineation of greek
life, but that shortly before his death he started on a voyage to greece,
to acquaint himself at first hand with the manners he depicted. [32] this
we can well believe, for even among roman poets terence is conspicuous for
his striking _realism_. his scenes are fictitious, it is true, and his
conversation is classical and refined, but both breathe the very spirit of
real life. there is, at least, nothing either ideal or imaginative about
them. the remark of horace [33] that "pomponius would have to listen to
rebukes like those of demea if his father were living; that if you broke
up the elegant rhythmical language you would find only what every angry
parent would say under the same circumstances," is perfectly just, and
constitutes one of the chief excellences of terence,--one which has made
him, like horace, a favourite with experienced men of the world.

terence as a rule does not base his play upon a single greek original, but
levies contributions from two or more, and exercises his talent in
harmonising the different elements. this process is known as
_contamination_; a word that first occurs in the prologue to the _andria_,
and indicates an important and useful principle in imitative dramatic
literature. the ground for this innovation is given by w. wagner as the
need felt by a roman audience for a quick succession of action, and their
impatience of those subtle dialogues which the greeks had so much admired,
and which in most greek plays occupy a somewhat disproportionate length.
the dramas in which "contamination" is most successfully used are, the
_eunuchus_, _andria_, and _adelphoe_; the last-mentioned being the only
instance in which the two models are by different authors, viz. the
_adelphoi_ of menander and the _synapothnaeskontes_ of diphilus. so far as
the metre and language went, terence seems to have followed the greek much
more closely than plautus, as was to be expected from his smaller
inventive power. quintilian, in commending him, expresses a wish that he
had confined himself to the trimeter iambic rhythm. to us this criticism
is somewhat obscure. did the romans require a more forcible style when the
long iambic or the trochaic was employed? or is it the weakness of his
metrical treatment that quintilian complains of? certainly the trochaics
of terence are less clearly marked in their rhythm than those of ennius or
plautus.

terence makes no allusion by name to any of his contemporaries; [34] but a
line in the _andria_ [35] is generally supposed to refer to caecilius, and
to indicate his friendly feeling, somewhat as virgil indicates his
admiration for ennius in the opening of the third georgic. [36] and the
"_vetus poeta_," (luscius lavinius) or "_quidam malevoli_," are alluded to
in all the prologues as trying to injure his fame. his first play was
produced in the year that caecilius died, 166 b.c.; the _hecyra_ next
year; the _hauton timorumenos_ in 163; the _eunuchus_ and _phormio_ in
161; the _adelphoe_ in 160; and in the following year the poet died at the
age of twenty-six, while sailing round the coast of greece. the maturity
of mind shown by so young a man is very remarkable. it must be remembered
that he belonged to a race whose faculties developed earlier than among
the romans, that he had been a slave, and was therefore familiar with more
than one aspect of life, and that he had enjoyed the society of the
greatest in rome, who reflected profoundly on social and political
questions. his influence, though imperfectly exercised in his lifetime,
increased after his death, not so much through the representation as the
reading of his plays. his language became one of the chief standards of
classical latin, and is regarded by mr. munro as standing on the very
highest level--the same as that of cicero, caesar, and lucretius. his
moral character was assailed soon after his death by porcius licinius, but
probably without good grounds. more might be said against the morality of
his plays--the morality of accommodation, as it is called by mommsen.
there is no strong grasp of the moral principle, but decency and propriety
should be respected; if an error has been committed, the best way is, if
possible, to find out that it was no error after all, or at least to treat
it as such. in no point does ancient comedy stand further apart from
modern ideas than in its view of married life; the wile is invariably the
dull legal partner, love for whom is hardly thought of, while the
sentiment of love (if indeed it be worthy of the name) is reserved for the
bacchis and thais, who, in the most popular plays turn out to be attic
citizens, and so are finally united to the fortunate lover.

but defective and erroneous as these views are, we must not suppose that
terence tries to make vice attractive. on the contrary, he distinctly says
that it is useful to know things as they really are for the purpose of
learning to choose the good and reject the evil. [37] moreover, his lover
is never a mere profligate, but proves the reality of his affection for
the victim of his wrong-doing by his readiness and anxiety in all cases to
become her husband.

terence has suggested many modern subjects. the _eunuchus_ is reflected in
the _bellamira_ of sir charles sedley and _le muet_ of brueys; the
_adelphi_ in moliere's _ecole des maris_ and baron's _l'ecole des peres_;
and the _phormio_ in moliere's _les fourberies de scapin_.

we need do no more than just notice the names of luscius lavinius, [38]
the older rival and detractor of terence; atilius, whose style is
characterised by cicero [39] as extremely harsh; trabea, who, like
atilius, was a contemporary of caecilius, and licinius imbrex, who
belonged to the older generation; turpilius, juventius, and valerius, [40]
who lived to a considerably later period. the former died as late as 103
b.c., having thus quite outlived the productiveness of the legitimate
dramatic art. he seems to have been livelier and more popular in his
diction than terence; it is to be regretted that so little of him remains.

the earliest cultivation of the national comedy (_togata_) [41] seems to
date from after the death of terence. its first representative is
titinius, about whom we know little or nothing, except that he based his
plays on the attic comedy, changing, however, the scene and the costumes.
the pieces, according to mommsen, were laid in southern latium, _e.g._
setia, ferentinum, or velitrae, and delineated with peculiar freshness the
life of these busy little towns. the titles of his comedies are--_coccus,
fullones, hortensius, quintius, varus, gemina, iurisperita, prilia,
privigna, psaltria, setina, tibicina, velitema, ulubrana_. from these we
should infer that his peculiar excellence lay in satirizing the weaknesses
of the other sex. as we have before implied, this type of comedy
originally arose in the country towns and maintained a certain antagonism
with the graecized comedy of rome. in a few years, however, we find it
established in the city, under t. quintius atta and l. afranius. of the
former little is known; of the latter we know that he was esteemed the
chief poet of _togatae_, and long retained his hold on the public.
quintilian [42] recognises his talent, but condemns the morality of his
plays. horace speaks of him as wearing a gown which would have fitted
menander, but this is popular estimation, not his own judgment.
nevertheless, we may safely assert that the comedies of afranius and
titinius, though often grossly indecent, had a thoroughly rich vein of
native humour, which would have made them very valuable indications of the
average popular culture of their day.




chapter v.

roman tragedy (ennius--accius, 239-94 b.c.).


as the italian talent for impromptu buffoonery might perhaps have in time
created a genuine native comedy, so the powerful and earnest rhetoric in
which the deeper feelings of the roman always found expression, might have
assumed the tragic garb and woven itself into happy and original alliance
with the dramatic instinct. but what actually happened was different.
tragedy, as well as comedy, took its subjects from the greek; but though
comedy had the advantage of a far greater popularity, and also of a
partially native origin, there is reason to believe that tragedy came the
nearer of the two to a really national form of art. in the fullest and
noblest sense of the word rome had indeed no national drama; for a drama,
to be truly representative, must be based on the deepest chords of
patriotic and even religious feeling. and that golden age of a people's
history when patriotism and religion are still wedded together, seeming
but varying reflections from the mirror of national life, is the most
favourable of all to the birth of dramatic art. in greece this was pre-
eminently the case. the spirit of patriotism is ever present--rarely,
indeed, suggesting, as in the _persae_ of aeschylus, the subject of the
play, but always supplying a rich background of common sympathy where poet
and people can feel and rejoice together. still more, if possible, is the
religious spirit present, as the animating influence which gives the drama
its interest and its vitality. the great moral and spiritual questions
which occupy the soul of man, in each play or series of plays, try to work
out their own solution by the natural human action of the characters, and
by those reflections on the part of the chorus to which the action
naturally gives rise. but with the transplanted tragedy of the romans this
could no longer be the case. the religious ideas which spoke straight to
the athenian's heart, spoke only to the acquired learning of the roman.
the idea of man, himself free, struggling with a destiny which he could
not comprehend or avert, is foreign to the roman conception of life. as
schlegel has observed, a truly roman tragic drama would have found an
altogether different basis. the binding force of "religio," constraining
the individual to surrender himself for the good of the supreme state, and
realising itself in acts of patriotic self-devotion; such would have been
the shape we should have expected roman tragedy to take, and if it failed
to do this, we should not expect it in other respects to be a great
success.

the strong appreciation which, notwithstanding its initial defects,
tragedy did meet with and retain for many generations, is a striking
testimony to the worth and talent of the men who introduced it. their
position as elevators of the popular taste was not the less real because
they themselves were men of provincial birth, and only partially polished
minds. both in the selection of their models and in the freedom of
treating them they showed that good sense which was characteristic of the
nation. as a rule, instead of trying to familiarise the people with
aeschylus and sophocles, poets who are essentially athenian, they
generally chose the freethinking and cosmopolitan euripides, who was
easily intelligible, and whose beauties did not seem so entirely to defy
imitation. what euripides was to greek tragedy menander was to comedy.
both denationalised their respective fields of poetry; both thereby
acquired a vast ascendancy over the roman mind, ready as it was to be
taught, and only awaiting a teacher whose views it could understand. now
although livius actually introduced, and naevius continued, the
translation of tragedies from the greek, it was ennius who first rendered
them with a definitely conceived purpose. this purpose was--to raise the
aesthetic sense of his countrymen, to set before them examples of heroic
virtue, and, above all, to enlighten their minds with what he considered
rational views on subjects of morals and and religion; though, after all,
the fatal facility with which the sceptical theories of euripides were
disseminated and embraced was hardly atoned for by the gain to culture
which undoubtedly resulted from the tragedian's labours. mommsen says with
truth that the stage is in its essence anti-roman, just as culture itself
is anti-roman; the one because it consumes time and interest on things
that interfere with the serious business of life, the other because it
creates degrees of intellectual position where the constitution intended
that all should be alike. but amid the vast change that came over the
roman habits of thought, which men like cato saw, resisted, and bewailed,
it mattered little whether old traditions were violated. the stage at once
became a powerful engine of popular education; and it rested with the poet
to decide whether it should elevate or degrade. political interests, it is
true, were carefully guarded. the police system, with which senatorial
narrowness environed the stage as it did all corporations or voluntary
societies, rigidly repressed and made penal anything like liberty of
speech. but it was none the less possible to inculcate the stern roman
virtues beneath the mask of an ajax or ulysses; and sellar has brought out
with singular clearness in his work on the poets of the republic the
national features which are stamped on this early tragedy, making it in
spite of its imperfections worthy of the great republic.

the oratorical mould in which all latin poetry except satire and comedy is
to a great extent cast, is visible from the beginning in tragedy. weighty
sentences follow one another until the moral effect is reached, or the
description fully turned. the rhythm seems to have been much more often
trochaic [1] than iambic, at least than trimeter iambic, for the
tetrameter is more frequently employed. this is not to be wondered at,
since even in comedy, where such high-flown cadences are out of place, the
people liked to hear them, measuring excellence by stateliness of march
rather than propriety of diction.

the popular demand for grandiloquence ennius (209-169 b.c.) was well able
to satisfy, for he had a decided leaning to it himself, and great skill in
attaining it. moreover he had a vivid power of reproducing the original
emotion of another. that reflected fervour which draws passion, not direct
from nature, but from nature as mirrored in a great work of art, stamps
ennius as a genuine roman in talent, while it removes him from the list of
creative poets. the chief sphere of his influence was epic poetry, but in
tragedy he founded a school which only closed when the drama itself was
silenced by the bloody massacres of the civil wars. born at rudiae in
calabria, and so half greek, half oscan, he served while a young man in
sardinia, where he rose to the rank of centurion, and was soon after
brought to rome by cato. there is something striking in the stern
reactionist thus introducing to rome the man who was more instrumental
than any other in overthrowing his hopes and fixing the new culture beyond
possibility of recall. when settled at rome, ennius gained a living by
teaching greek, and translating plays for the stage. he also wrote
miscellaneous poems, and among them a panegyric on scipio which brought
him into favourable notice. his fame must have been established before
b.c. 189, for in that year fulvius nobilior took him into aetolia to
celebrate his deeds a proceeding which cato strongly but ineffectually
impugned. in 184 b.c., the roman citizenship was conferred on him. he
alluded to this with pride in his annals--

  "nos sumus romani qui fuvimus ante rudini."

during the last twenty years of his life his friendship with scipio and
fulvius must have ensured him respect and sympathy as well as freedom from
distasteful labour. but he was never in affluent circumstances; [2] partly
through his own fault, for he was a free liver, as horace tells us [3]--

  "ennius ipse pater nunquam nisi potus ad arma
  prosiluit dicenda;"

and he himself alludes to his lazy habits, saying that he never wrote
poetry unless confined to the house by gout. [4] he died in the seventieth
year of his age and was buried in the tomb of the scipios, where a marble
statue of him stood between those of p. and l. scipio.

ennius is not merely "the father of roman poetry;" he held also as a man a
peculiar and influential position, which we cannot appreciate, without
connecting him with his patron and friend, the great scipio africanus.
nearly of an age, united by common tastes and a common spiritual
enthusiasm, these two distinguished men wrought together for a common
object. their familiarity with greek culture and knowledge of greek
religious ideas seem to have filled both with a high sense of their
position as teachers of their countrymen. scipio drew around him a circle
of aristocratic liberals. ennius appealed rather to the people at large.
the policy of the elder scipio was continued by his adopted son with far
less breadth of view, but with more refined taste, and more concentrated
effort. where africanus would have sought his inspiration from the poetry,
aemilianus went rather to the philosophy, of greece; he was altogether of
a colder temperament, just as his literary friends terence and lucilius
were by nature less ardent than ennius. between them they laid the
foundation of that broader conception of civilisation which is expressed
by the significant word _humanitas_, and which had borne its intellectual
fruit when the whole people raised a shout of applause at the line in the
_hautontimorumenos_--

  "homo sum: humani nihil a me alienum puto."

this conception, trite as it seems to us, was by no means so when it was
thus proclaimed: if philosophers had understood it (_apas anthropos
anthropo oikeion kai philon_.--_ar. eth. n._ lib. 9), they had never made
it a principle of action; and the teachers who had caused even the
uneducated roman populace to recognise its speculative truth must be
allowed to have achieved something great. some historians of rome have
seen in this attitude a decline from old roman exclusiveness, almost a
treasonable conspiracy against the roman idea of the state. hence they
have regarded ennius with something of that disfavour which cato in his
patriotic zeal evinced for him. the justification of the poet's course, if
it is to be sustained at all, must be sought in the necessity for an
expansion of national views to meet the exigences of an increasing foreign
empire. external coercion might for a time suffice to keep divergent
nationalities together; but the only durable power would be one founded on
sympathy with the subject peoples on the broad ground of a common
humanity. and for this the poet and his patron bore witness with a
consistent and solemn, though often irreverent, earnestness. ennius had
early in life shown a tendency towards the mystic speculations of
pythagoreanism: traces of it are seen in his assertion that the soul of
homer had migrated into him through a peacock, [5] and that he had three
souls because he knew three languages; [6] while the satirical notice of
horace seems to imply that he, like scipio, regarded himself as specially
favoured of heaven--

            "leviter curare videtur
  quo promissa caadant et somnia pythagorea." [7]

at the same time he studied the epicurean system, and in particular, the
doctrines of euhemerus, whose work on the origin of the gods he
translated. his denial of divine providence is well known [8]--

  "ego deum genus esse dixi et dicam semper caelitum:
  sed eos non curare opinor quid agat humanum genus.
  nam si curent, bene bonis sit, male malis, quod nunc abest."

of these two inconsistent points of view, the second, as we should expect
in a nature so little mystical, finally prevailed, so that ennius may well
be considered the preacher of scepticism or the bold impugner of popular
superstition according to the point of view which we assume. in addition
to these philosophic aspirations he had a strong desire to reach artistic
perfection, and to be the herald of a new literary epoch. conscious of his
success and proud of the power he wielded over the minds of the people, he
alludes more than once to his performances in a self-congratulatory
strain--

  "enni poeta salve, qui mortalibus
  versus propinas flammeos medullitus."

"hail! poet ennius, who pledgest mankind in verses fiery to the heart's
core." and with even higher confidence in his epitaph--

  "aspicite, o cives, senis enni imagini' formam:
    hic vostrum panxit maxima faeta patrum.
  nemo me lacrimis decoret nec funera fletu
    faxit. cur? volito vivu' per ora virum."

we shall illustrate the above remarks by quoting one or two passages from
the fragments of his tragedies, which, it is true, are now easily
accessible to the general reader, but nevertheless will not be out of
place in a manual like the present, which is intended to lead the student
to study historically for himself the progress of the literature. the
first is a dialogue between hecuba and cassandra, from the _alexander_.
cassandra feels the prophetic impulse coming over her, the symptoms of
which her mother notices with alarm:

                          "hec.
  "sed quid oculis rabere visa es derepente ar dentibus?
  ubi tua illa paulo ante sapiens virginali' modestia?

                           cas.
  mater optumarum multo mulier melior mulierum,
  missa sum superstitiosis ariolationibus.
  namque apollo fatis fandis dementem invitam ciret:
  virgines aequales vereor, patris mei meum factmn pudet,
  optimi viri. mea mater, tui me miseret, me piget:
  optumam progeniem priamo peperisti extra me: hoc dolet:
  men obesse, illos prodesse, me obstare, illos obsequi!"

she then sees the vision--

       *       *       *       *       *
  "adest adest fax obvoluta sanguine atque incendio!
  multos annos latuit: cives ferte opem et restinguite!
    iamque mari magno classis cita
    texitur: exitium examen rapit:
    advenit, et fera velivolantibus
    navibus complebit manus litora."

this is noble poetry. another passage from the _telamo_ is as follows:--

  "sed superstitiosi vates impudentesque arioli,
  aut inertes aut insani aut quibus egestas imperat,
  qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam,
  quibus divitias pollicentur, ab eis drachumam ipsi petunt.
  de his divitiis sibi deducant drachumam, reddant cetera."

here he shows, like so many of his countrymen, a strong vein of satire.
the metre is trochaic, scanned, like these of plautus and terence, by
accent as much as by quantity, and noticeable for the careless way in
which whole syllables are slurred over. in the former fragment the fourth
line must be scanned--

                             ___             ___   ____
  "virgi | nes ae | quales | vercor | patris mei | meum fac | tum pudet."

horace mentions the ponderous weight of his iambic lines, which were
loaded with spondees. the anapaestic measure, of which he was a master,
has an impetuous swing that carries the reader away, and, while producing
a different effect from its greek equivalent, in capacity is not much
inferior to it. many of his phrases and metrical terms are imitated in
virgil, though such imitation is much more frequently drawn from his
hexameter poems. he wrote one _praetexta_ and several comedies, but these
latter were uncongenial to his temperament, and by no means successful. he
had little or no humour. his poetical genius was earnest rather than
powerful; probably he had less than either naevius or plautus; but his
higher cultivation, his serious view of his art, and the consistent
pursuit of a well-conceived aim, placed him on a dramatic level nearly as
high as plautus in the opinion of the ciceronian critics. his literary
influence will be more fully discussed under his epic poems.

his sister's son pacuvius (220-132 b.c.), next claims our attention. this
celebrated tragedian, on whom the complimentary epithet _doctus_ [9] was
by general consent bestowed, was brought up at brundisium, where amid
congenial influences he practised with success the art of a painter. at
what time he came to rome is not known, but he gained great renown there
by his paintings before attaining the position of chief tragic poet. pliny
tells us of a picture in the temple of hercules in the forum boarium,
which was considered as only second to that of fabius pictor. with the
enthusiasm of the poet he united that genial breadth of temper which among
artists seems peculiarly the painter's gift. happy in his twofold career
(for he continued to paint as well as to write), [10] free from jealousy
as from want, successful as a poet and as a man, he lived at rome until
his eightieth year, the friend of laelius and of his younger rival accius,
and retired soon after to his native city where he received the visits of
younger writers, and died at the great age of eighty-eight (132 b.c.). his
long career was not productive of a large number of works. we know of but
twelve tragedies and one _praetexta_ by him. the latter was called
_paullus_, and had for its hero the conqueror of perseus, king of
macedonia, but no fragments of it survive. the great authority which the
name of pacuvius possessed was due to the care with which he elaborated
his writings. thirteen plays and a few _saturae_ in a period of at least
thirty years [11] seems but a small result; but the admirable way in which
he sustained the dramatic situations made every one of them popular with
the nation. there were two, however, that stood decidedly above the rest--
the _antiopa_ and the _dulorestes_. of the latter cicero tells the
anecdote that the people rose as one man to applaud the noble passage in
which pylades and orestes contend for the honour of dying for one another.
[12] of the former he speaks in the highest terms, though it is possible
that in his admiration for the severe and truly roman sentiments it
inculcated, he may have been indulgent to its artistic defects. the few
lines that have come down to us resemble that ridiculed by persius [13]
for its turgid mannerisms. a good instance of the excellences which a
roman critic looked for in tragedy is afforded by the praise cicero
bestows on the _niptra_, a play imitated from sophocles. the passage is so
interesting that it may well be added here. [14] cicero's words are--

"the wise greek (ulysses) when severely wounded does not lament overmuch;
he curbs the expression of his pain. 'forward gently,' he says, 'and with
quiet effort, lest by jolting me you increase the pangs of my wound.' now,
in this pacuvius excels sophocles, who makes ulysses give way to cries and
tears. and yet those who are carrying him, out of consideration for the
majesty of him they bear, do not hesitate to rebuke even this moderate
lamentation. 'we see indeed, ulysses, that you have suffered grievous
hurt, but methinks for one who has passed his life in arms, you show too
soft a spirit.' the skilful poet knows that habit is a good teacher how to
bear pain. and so ulysses, though in extreme agony, still keeps command
over his words. 'stop! hold, i say! the ulcer has got the better of me.
strip off my clothes. o, woe is me! i am in torture.' here he begins to
give way; but in a moment he stops--'cover me; depart, now leave me in
peace; for by handling me and jolting me you increase the cruel pain.' do
you observe how it is not the cessation of bodily anguish, but the
necessity of chastening the expression of it that keeps him silent? and
so, at the close of the play, while himself dying, he has so far conquered
himself that he can reprove others in words like these,--'it is meet to
complain of adverse fortune, but not to bewail it. that is the part of a
man; but weeping is granted to the nature of woman.' the softer feelings
here obey the other part of the mind, as a dutiful soldier obeys a stern
commander."

we can go with cicero in admiring the manly spirit that breathes through
these lines, and feel that the poet was justified in so far leaving the
original as without prejudice to the dramatic effect to inculcate a higher
moral lesson.

as to the treatment of his models we may say, generally, that pacuvius
used more freedom than ennius. he was more of an adapter and less of a
translator. nevertheless this dependence on his own resources for
description appears to have cramped rather than freed his style. the early
latin writers seem to move more easily when rendering the familiar greek
originals than when essaying to steer their own path. he also committed
the mistake of generally imitating sophocles, the untransplantable child
of athens, instead of euripides, to whom he could do better justice, as
the success of his euripidean plays prove. [15] his style, though
emphatic, was wanting in naturalness. the author of the treatise to
herennius contrasts the _sententiae_ of ennius with the _periodi_ of
pacuvius; and lucilius speaks of a word "contorto aliquo ex pacuviano
exordio."

quintilian [16] notices the inelegance of his compounds, and makes the
just remark that the old writers attempted to reproduce greek analogies
without sufficient regard for the capacities of their language; thus while
the word _kyrtauchaen_ is elegant and natural, its latin equivalent
_incurvicervicus_, borders on the ludicrous. [17] some of his fragments
show the same sceptical tendencies that are prominent in ennius. one of
them contains a comprehensive survey of the different philosophic systems,
and decides in favour of blind chance (_temeritas_) as the ruling power,
on the ground of sudden changes in fortune like that of orestes, who in
one day was metamorphosed from a king into a beggar. pacuvius either
improved his later style, or else confined its worst points to his
tragedies, for nothing can be more classical and elegant than his epitaph,
which is couched in diction as refined as that of terence--

  adulescens, tametsi properas, te hoc saxum vocat
  ut sese aspicias, delude quod scriptumst legas.
  hic sunt poetae pacuvi marci sita
  ossa. hoc volebam nescius ne esses. vale.

when pacuvius retired to brundisium he left a worthy successor in l.
attius or accius (170-94 b.c.), whom, as before observed, he had assisted
with his advice, showing kindly interest as a fellow-workman rather than
jealousy as a rival. accius's parents belonged to the class of
_libertini_; they settled at pisaurum. the poet began his dramatic career
at the age of thirty with the _atreus_, and continued to exhibit until his
death. he forms the link between the ante-classical and ciceronian epochs;
for cicero when a boy [18] conversed with him, and retained always a
strong admiration for his works. [19] he had a high notion of the dignity
of his calling. there is a story told of his refusing to rise to caesar
when he entered the collegium poetarum; but if by this julius be meant,
the chronology makes the occurrence impossible. besides thirty-seven
tragedies, he wrote _annales_ (apparently mythological histories in
hexameters, something of the character of ovid's _fasti_), _didascalia_,
or a history of greek and roman poetry, and other kindred works, as well
as two _praetextae_.

the fragments that have reached us are tolerably numerous, and enable us
to select certain prominent characteristics of his style. the loftiness
for which he is celebrated seems to be of expression rather than of
thought, _e.g._

  "quid? quod videbis laetum in parnasi iugo
  bicipi inter pinos tripudiantem in circulis
  concutere thyrsos ludo, taedis fulgere;"

but sometimes a noble sentiment is simply and emphatically expressed--

  "non genus virum ornat, generi vir fortis loco."  [20]

he was a careful chooser of words, _e.g._

  "tu _pertinaciam_ esse, antiloche, hanc praedicas,
  ego _pervicaciam_ aio et ea me uti volo:
  haec fortis sequitur, illam indocti possident....
  nam pervicacem dici me esse et vincere
  perfacile patior, pertinaciam nil moror." [21]

these distinctions, obvious as they are to us, were by no means so to the
early romans. close resemblance in sound seemed irresistibly to imply some
connexion more than that of mere accident; and that turning over the
properties of words, which in philosophy as well as poetry seems to us to
have something childish in it, had its legitimate place in the development
of each language. accius paints action with vigour. we have the following
spirited fragment--

  "constituit, cognovit, sensit, conlocat sese in locum
  celsum: hinc manibus rapere raudus saxeum et grave."

and again--

  "heus vigiles properate, expergite,
  pectora tarda, sopore exsurgite!"

he was conspicuous among tragedians for a power of reasoned eloquence of
the forensic type; and delighted in making two rival pleaders state their
case, some of his most successful scenes being of this kind. his opinions
resembled those of ennius, but were less irreverent. he acknowledges the
interest of the gods in human things--

  "nam non facile sine deum opera humana propria [22] sunt bona,"

and in a fragment of the _brutus_ he enforces the doctrine that dreams are
often heaven-sent warnings, full of meaning to those that will understand
them. nevertheless his contempt for augury was equal to that of his
master--

  "nil credo auguribus qui auris verbis divitant
  alienas, suas ut auro locupletent domos."

the often-quoted maxim of the tyrant _oderint dum metuant_ is first found
in him. altogether, he was a powerful writer, with less strength perhaps,
but more polish than ennius; and while manipulating words with greater
dexterity, losing but little of that stern grandeur which comes from the
plain utterance of conviction. his general characteristics place him
altogether within the archaic age. in point of time little anterior to
cicero, in style he is almost a contemporary of ennius. the very slight
increase of linguistic polish during the century and a quarter which
comprises the tragic art of rome, is somewhat remarkable. the old-
fashioned ornaments of assonance, alliteration, and plays upon words are
as frequent in accius as in livius, or rather more so; and the number of
archaic forms is scarcely smaller. we see words like _noxitudo,
honestitudo, sanctescat, topper, domuitio, redhostire_, and wonder that
they could have only preceded by a few years the latin of cicero, and were
contemporary with that of gracchus. accius, like so many romans, was a
grammarian; he introduced certain changes into the received spelling,
_e.g._ he wrote _aa, ee_, etc. when the vowel was long, reserving the
single _a, e_, etc. for the short quantity. it was in acknowledgment of
the interest taken by him in these studies that varro dedicated to him one
of his many philological treatises. the date of his death is not quite
certain; but it may be safely assigned to about 90 b.c. with him died
tragic writing at rome: scarcely a generation after we find tragedy has
donned the form of the closet drama, written only for recitation. cicero
and his brother assiduously cultivated this rhetorical art. when writing
failed, however, acting rose, and the admirable performances of aesopus
and roscius did much to keep alive an interest in the old works. varius
and pollio seem for a moment to have revived the tragic muse under
augustus, but their works had probably nothing in common with this early
but interesting drama; and in imperial times tragedy became more and more
confused with rhetoric, until delineation of character ceased to be an
object, and declamatory force or fine point was the chief end pursued.




chapter vi.

epic poetry. ennius--furius (200-100 b.c.)


we must now retrace our steps, and consider ennius in the capacity of epic
poet. it was in this light that he acquired his chief contemporary renown,
that he accredits himself to posterity in his epitaph, and that he
obtained that commanding influence over subsequent poetic literature,
which, stereotyped in virgil, was never afterwards lost. the merit of
discerning the most favourable subject for a roman epic belongs to
naevius; in this department ennius did but borrow of him; it was in the
form in which he cast his poem that his originality was shown. the
legendary history of rome, her supposed connection with the issues of the
trojan war, and her subsequent military achievements in the sphere of
history, such was the groundwork both of naevius's and ennius's
conception. and, however unsuitable such a consecutive narrative might be
for a heroic poem, there was something in it that corresponded with the
national sentiment, and in a changed form it re-appears in the _aeneid_.
naevius had been contented with a single episode in rome's career of
conquest. ennius, with more ambition but less judgment, aspired to grasp
in an epic unity the entire history of the nation; and to achieve this, no
better method occurred to him than the time-honoured and prosaic system of
annals. the difficulty of recasting these in a poetic mould might well
have staggered a more accomplished master of song; but to the enthusiastic
and laborious bard the task did not seem too great. he lived to complete
his work in accordance with the plan he had proposed, and though, perhaps,
the _manus ultima_ may have been wanting, there is nothing to show that he
was dissatisfied with his results. we may perhaps smile at the vanity
which aspired to the title of roman homer, and still more at the
partiality which so willingly granted it; nevertheless, with all
deductions on the score of rude conception and ruder execution, the
fragments that remain incline us to concur with scaliger in wishing that
fate had spared us the whole, and denied us silius, statius, lucan, "et
tous ces garcons la." the whole was divided into eighteen books, of which
the first contained the introduction, the earliest traditions, the
foundation of rome, and the deification of romulus; the second and third
contained the regal period; the fourth began the history of the republic
and carried it down to the burning of the city by the gauls; the fifth
comprised the samnite wars; the sixth, that with pyrrhus; the seventh, the
first punic war; the eighth and ninth, the war with hannibal; the tenth
and eleventh, that with macedonia; the twelfth, thirteenth, and
fourteenth, that with syria; the fifteenth, the campaign of fulvius
nobilior in aetolia, and ended apparently with the death of the great
scipio. the work then received a new preface, and continued the history
down to the poet's last years, containing many personal notices, until it
was finally brought to a close in 172 b.c. after having occupied its
author eighteen years. [1] "the interest of this last book," says
conington, [2] "must have centred, at least to us, in the discourse about
himself, in which the old bard seems to have indulged in closing this his
greatest poem. even now we may read with sympathy his boastful allusion to
his late enrolment among the citizens of the conquering city; we may be
touched by the mention he appears to have made of the year of his age in
which he wrote, bordering closely on the appointed term of man's life; and
we may applaud as the curtain falls on his grand comparison of himself to
a victorious racer laden with olympian honours, and now at last consigned
to repose:--

  'sicut fortis equus, spatio qui saepe supremo
  vicit olimpia, nunc senio confectus quiescit.'"

he was thus nearly fifty when he began to write, a fact which strikes us
as remarkable. we are accustomed to associate the poetic gift with a
highly-strung nervous system, and unusual bodily conditions not favourable
to long life, as well as with a precocious special development which
proclaims unmistakably in the boy the future greatness of the man. none of
these conditions seem to have been present in the early roman school.
livius was a quiet schoolmaster, naevius a vigorous soldier, ennius a
self-indulgent but hard-working _litterateur_, plautus an active man,
whose animal spirits not even the flour-mill could quench, pacuvius a
steady but genial student, accius and terence finished men of the world;
and all, except terence (and he probably met his early death through an
accident), enjoyed the full term of man's existence. moreover, few of them
began life by being poets, and some, as ennius and plautus, did not apply
themselves to poetry until they had reached mature years. with these facts
the character of their genius as a rule agrees. we should not expect in
such men the fine inspiration of a sophocles, a goethe, or a shelley, and
we do not find it. the poetic frenzy, so magnificently described in the
_phaedrus_ of plato, which caused the greeks to regard the poet in his
moments of creation as actually possessed by the god, is nowhere manifest
among the early romans; and if it claims to appear in their later
literature, we find it after all a spurious substitute, differing widely
from the emotion of creative genius. it is not mere accident that rome is
as little productive in the sphere of speculative philosophy as she is in
that of the highest poetry, for the two endowments are closely allied. the
problem each sets before itself is the same; to arrest and embody in an
intelligible shape the idea that shall give light to the dark questionings
of the intellect, or the vague yearnings of the heart. to rome it has not
been given to open a new sphere of truth, or to add one more to the mystic
voices of passion; her epic mission is the humbler but still not ignoble
one of bracing the mind by her masculine good sense, and linking together
golden chains of memory by the majestic music of her verse.

there were two important elements introduced into the mechanism of the
story by ennius; the olympic pantheon, and the presentation of the roman
worthies as heroes analogous to those of greece. the latter innovation was
only possible within narrow limits, for the idea formed by the romans even
of their greatest heroes, as romulus, numa, or camillus was different in
kind from that of the greek hero-worshipper. thus we see that virgil
abstains from applying the name to any of his italian characters,
confining it to such as are mentioned in homer, or are connected with the
homeric legends. still we find at a later period julius caesar publicly
professing his descent on both sides from a superhuman ancestor, for such
he practically admits ancus martius to be. [3] and in the epic of silius
italicus the roman generals occupy quite the conventional position of the
hero-leader.

the admission of the olympic deities as a kind of divine machinery for
diversifying and explaining the narrative was much more pregnant with
consequences. outwardly, it is simply adopted from homer, but the spirit
which animates it is altogether different. the greek, in spite of his
intellectual scepticism, retained an aesthetic and emotional belief in his
national gods, and at any rate it was natural that he should celebrate
them in his verse; but the roman poet claimed to utilize the greek
pantheon for artistic purposes alone. he professed no belief in the beings
he depicted. they were merely an ornamental, supernatural element, either
introduced at will, as in horace, or regulated according to traditional
conceptions, as in ennius and virgil. apollo, minerva, and bacchus, were
probably no more to him than they are to us. they were names, consecrated
by genius and convenient for art, under which could be combined the
maximum of beautiful associations with the minimum of trouble to the poet.
the custom, which perpetuated itself in latin poetry, revived again with
the rise of italian art; and under a modified form its influence may be
seen in the grand conceptions of milton. the true nature of romantic
poetry is, however, alien to any such mechanical employment of the
supernatural, and its comparative infrequency in the highest english and
german poetry, stamps these as products of the modern spirit. had the
romans left olympus to itself, and occupied themselves only with the
rhetorical delineation of human action and feeling, they would have chosen
a less ambitious but certainly more original path. lucretius struggles
against the prevailing tendency; but so unable were the romans to invest
their finer fancies with any other shape, that even while he is blaming
the custom he unawares falls into it.

it was in the metrical treatment that ennius's greatest achievement lay.
for the first time in any consecutive way he introduced the hexameter into
latin poetry. it is true that plautus had composed his epitaph in that
measure, if we may trust varro's judgment on its genuineness. [4] and the
marcian oracles, though their rhythm has been disputed, were in all
probability written in the same. [5] but these last were translations, and
were in no sense an epoch in literature. ennius compelled the intractable
forms of latin speech to accommodate themselves to the dactylic rhythm.
difficulties of two kinds met him, those of accent and those of quantity.
the former had been partially surmounted by the comic writers, and it only
required a careful extension of their method to render the deviations from
the familiar emphasis of daily life harmonious and acceptable. in respect
of quantity the problem was more complex. plautus had disregarded it in
numerous instances (_e.g. dari_), and in others had been content to
recognize the natural length or shortness of a vowel (_e.g. senex ipse_),
neglecting the subordinate laws of position, &c. this custom had, as far
as we know, guided ennius himself in his dramatic poems; but for the epos
he adopted a different principle. taking advantage of the tendency to
shorten final vowels, he fixed almost every doubtful case as short, _e.g.
musa, patre, dare, omnibus, amaveris, pater_, only leaving the long
syllable where the metre required it, as _condiderit_. by this means he
gave a dactylic direction to latin prosody which it afterwards, though
only slightly, extended. at the same time he observed carefully the greek
laws of position and the doubled letters. he admitted hiatus, but not to
any great extent, and chiefly in the caesura. the lengthening of a short
vowel by the ictus occurs occasionally in his verses, but almost always in
words where it was originally by nature long. in such words the
lengthening may take place even in the thesis of the foot, as in--

  "non enim rumores ponebat ante salutem."

elision played a prominent part in his system. this was natural,
since with all his changes many long or intractable terminations
remained, _e.g. enim, quidem, omnium_, &c. these were generally
elided, sometimes shortened as in the line quoted, sometimes
lengthened as in the comedians,--

  "inimicitiam agitantes."

very rarely does he improperly shorten a naturally long vowel, _e.g.
contra_ (twice); terminations in _o_ he invariably retains, except _ego_
and _modo_. the final _s_ is generally elided before a consonant when in
the thesis of the foot, but often remains in the arsis (_e.g. plenu'
fidei, isque dies_). the two chief blots on his versification are his
barbarous examples of tmesis,--_saxo cere comminuit brum: massili portant
invenes ad litora tanas_ (= cerebrum, massilitanas), and his quaint
apocope, _cael, gau, do_ (_caelum, gaudium, domum_), probably reflected
from the homeric _do, kri_, in which lucilius imitates him, _e.g. nol._
(for _nolueris_). the caesura, which forms the chief feature in each
verse, was not understood by ennius. several of his lines have no caesura
at all; and that delicate alternation of its many varieties which charms
us in homer and virgil, is foreign to the conception, as it would have
been unattainable by the efforts, of the rugged epic bard. nevertheless
his labour achieved a great result. he stamped for centuries the character
and almost the details of subsequent versification. [6] if we study the
effect of his passages, we shall observe far greater power in single lines
or sentences than in a continuous description. the solemn grandeur of some
of his verses is unsurpassable, and, enshrined in the aeneid, their
dignity seems enhanced by their surroundings. such are--

  "tuque pater tiberine tuo cum ilumino sancto."

  "unus homo nobis cunctando restituit rem."

  "quae neque dardaniis campis potuere perire
  nec quom capta capi, nec quom combusta cremari,
  augusto augurio postquam incluta condita roma est."

on the other hand he sometimes falls into pure prose;

  "cives romani tum facti sunt campani,"

and the like, are scarcely metre, certainly not poetry. later epicists in
their desire to avoid this fault over elaborate their commonplace
passages. ennius tries, however clumsily, to copy homer in dismissing them
without ornament. the one or two similes that are preserved are among his
least happy efforts. [7] among battle scenes he is more at home, and these
he paints with reality and strength. there are three passages of
considerable length, which the reader who desires to judge of his
narrative power should study. they are the dream of ilia and the auspices
of romulus in the first book, and the description of the friend of
servilius in the seventh. this last is generally thought to be a picture
of the poet himself, and to intimate in the most pleasing language his
relations to his great patron. for a singularly appreciative criticism of
these fragments the student is referred to sellar's _poets of the
republic_. the massive roman vigour of treatment which shone forth in the
_annals_ and made them as it were a rock-hewn monument of rome's glory,
secured to ennius a far greater posthumous renown than that of any of the
other early poets. cicero extols him, and has no words too contemptuous
for those who despise him, lucretius praises him in the well known words--

  "ennius ut noster cecinit, qui primus amoeno
  detulit ex helicone perenni fronde coronam,
  per gentis italas hominum quae clara clueret." [8]

virgil, it is true, never mentions him, but he imitates him continually.
ovid, with generous appreciation, allows the greatness of his talent,
though he denies him art; [9] and the later imperial writers are even
affected in their admiration of him. he continued to be read through the
middle ages, and was only lost as late as the thirteenth century.

ennius produced a few scattered imitators, but not until upwards of two
generations after his death, if we except the doubtful case of accius. the
first is matius, who translated the iliad into hexameters. this may be
more properly considered as the sequel to livius, but the few fragments
remaining show that his versification was based on that of ennius.
gellius, with his partiality for all that was archaic, warmly praises this
work.

hostius wrote the _bellum istricum_ in three books. this was no doubt a
continuation of the great master's _annales_. what the war was is not
quite certain. some fix it at 178 b.c.; others as late as 129 b.c. the
earlier date is the more probable. we then have to ask when hostius
himself lived. teuffel inclines to place him before accius; but most
commentators assign him a later date. a few lines are preserved in
macrobius, [10] which seem to point to an early period, _e.g._

            "non si mihi linguae
  centum atque ora sient totidem vocesque liquatae,"

and again,

  "dia minerva, semol autem tu invictus apollo
  arquitenens latonius."

his object in quoting these is to show that they were copied by virgil. a
passage in propertius has been supposed to refer to him, [11]

  "splendidaque a docto fama refulget avo,"

where he would presumably be the grandfather of that hostia whom under the
name of cynthia so many of propertius's poems celebrate. another poet of
whom a few lines are preserved in gellius and macrobius is a. furius of
antium, which little town produced more than one well-known writer. his
work was entitled _annals_. specimens of his versification are--

  "interea oceani linquens aurora cubile."

  "quod genus hoc hominum saturno sancte create?"

  "pressatur pede pes, mucro mucrone, viro vir." [12]




chapter vii.

the early history of satire (ennius to lucilius)

200-103 b.c.


satire, as every one knows, is the one branch of literature claimed by the
romans as their own. [1] it is, at any rate, the branch in which their
excellence is most characteristically displayed. nor is the excellence
confined to the professed satirists; it was rather inherent in the genius
of the nation. all their serious writings tended to assume at times a
satirical spirit. tragedy, so far as we can judge, rose to her clearest
tones in branding with contempt the superstitions of the day. the epic
verses of ennius are not without traces of the same power. the prose of
cato abounds with sarcastic reflections, pointedly expressed. the
arguments of cicero's theological and moral treatises are largely
sprinkled with satire. the whole poem of lucretius is deeply imbued with
it: few writers of any age have launched more fiery sarcasm upon the fear
of death, or the blind passion of love than he has done in his third and
fourth books. even the gentle virgil breaks forth at times into earnest
invective, tipped with the flame of satire: [2] dido's bitter irony,
turnus' fierce taunts, show that he could wield with stern effect this
specially roman weapon. lucan and seneca affect a style which, though
grotesque, is meant to be satirical; while at the close of the classical
period, tacitus transforms the calm domain of history into satire, more
burning because more suppressed than that of any of his predecessors. [3]

the claim to an independent origin advanced by quintilian has been more
than once disputed. the name _satire_ has been alleged as indicative of a
greek original (_satyrion_). [4] it is true this can no longer be
maintained. still some have thought that the poems of archilochus or the
_silli_ may have suggested the roman form of composition. but the former,
though full of invective, were iambic or personal, not properly satirical.
and the _silli_, of which examples are found in diogenes laertius and dio
chrysostom, were rather patched together from the verses of serious
writers, forming a kind of _cento_ like the _carmen nuptiale_ of ausonius,
than original productions. the roman satire differed from these in being
essentially _didactic_. besides ridiculing the vices and absurdities of
individuals or of society, it had a serious practical purpose, viz. the
improvement of public culture or morals. thus it followed the old comedy
of athens in its plain speaking, and the method of archilochus in its
bitter hostility to those who provoked attack. but it differed from the
former in its non-political bias, as well as its non-dramatic form: and
from the latter in its motive, which is not personal enmity, but public
spirit. thus the assertion of horace, that lucilius is indebted to the old
comedians, [5] must be taken in a general sense only, and not be held to
invalidate the generally received opinion that, in its final and perfected
form, satire was a genuine product of rome.

the metres adopted by satire was originally indifferent. the _saturae_ of
ennius were composed in trochaics, hexameters, and iambics; those of varro
(called _menippean_, from menippus of gadara), mingled together prose and
verse. [6] but from lucilius onwards, satire, accurately so called, was
always treated in hexameter verse. [7]

nevertheless, horace is unquestionably right in saying that it had more
real affinity for prose than for poetry of any kind--

  "primum ego me illorum, dederim quibus esse poetis,
  excerpam numero: neque enim concludere versum
  dixeris esse satis; neque si quis scribat, uti nos,
  sermoni propiora, pates hunc esse poetam." [8]

the essence of satiric talent is that it should be able to understand the
complexities of real life, that it should penetrate beneath the surface to
the true motives of action, and if these are bad, should indicate by life-
like touches their ridiculous or contemptible nature. there is room here
for great variety of treatment and difference of _personnel_. one may have
a broad and masculine grasp of the main outlines of social intercourse;
another with subtler analysis may thread his way through the intricacies
of dissimulation, and lay bare to the hypocrite secrets which he had
concealed even from himself; a third may select certain provinces of
conduct or thought, and by a good-humoured but discriminating portraiture,
throw them into so new and clear a light, as to enable mankind to look at
them, free from the prejudices with which convention so often blinds our
view.

the qualifications for excelling in this kind of writing are clearly such
as have no special connection with poetry. had the modern prose essay
existed at rome, it is probable the satirists would have availed
themselves of it. from the fragments of lucilius we should judge that he
found the trammels of verse somewhat embarrassing. practice had indeed
enabled him to write with unexampled fluency; [9] but except in this
mechanical facility he shows none of the characteristics of a poet. the
accumulated experience of modern life has pronounced in favour of
abandoning the poetic form, and including satire in the domain of prose.
no doubt many celebrated poets in france and england have cultivated verse
satire; but in most cases they have merely imitated, whereas the prose
essay is a true formation of modern literary art. conington, in an
interesting article, [10] regards the progressive enlargement of the
sphere of prose composition as a test of a nation's intellectual advance.
thus considered, poetry is the imperfect attempt to embody in vivid
language ideas which have themselves hardly assumed definite form, and
necessarily gives way to prose when clearness of thought and sequence of
reasoning have established for themselves a more perfect vehicle. however
inadequate such a view may be to explain the full nature of poetry, it is
certainly true so far as concerns the case at present before us. the
assignment of each special exercise of mind to its proper department of
literature is undoubtedly a late growth of human culture, and such nations
as have not attained to it, whatever may be the splendour of their
literary creations, cannot be said to have reached the full maturity of
intellectual development.

the conception of satire by the ancients is illustrated by a passage in
diomedes: [11] "_satira dicitur carmen apud romanos nunc quidem maledicum
et ad carpenda hominum vitia archaeae comoediae charactere compositum,
quale scripserunt lucilius et horatius et persius; at olim carmen quod ex
variis poematibus constabat satira cocabatur, quale scripserunt pacuvius
et ennius_." this old-fashioned _satura_ of ennius may be considered as
half-way between the early semi-dramatic farce and the classical satire.
it was a genuine medley, containing all kinds of subjects, often couched
in the form of dialogue, but intended for recitation, not for action. the
poem on scipio was classed with it, but what this poem was is not by any
means clear; from the fragment that remains, describing a calm after storm
in sonorous language, we should gather that scipio's return voyage from
africa may have formed its theme. [12] other subjects, included in the
_saturae_ of ennius, were the _hedyphagetica_, a humorous didactic poem on
the mysteries of gastronomy, which may have suggested similar effusions by
lucilius and horace; [13] the _epicharmus_ and _euhemerus_, both in
trochaics, the latter a free translation of the _iera anagraphae_, or
explanation of the gods as deified mortals; and the _epigrams_, among
which two on the great scipio are still preserved, the first breathing the
spirit of the republic, the second asserting with some arrogance the
exploits of the hero, and his claims to a place among the denizens of
heaven. [14]

of the _saturae_ of pacuvius nothing is known. c. lucilius (148-103 b.c.),
the founder of classical satire, was born in the latin town of suessa
aurunca in campania. he belonged to an equestrian family, and was in easy
circumstances. [15] he is supposed to have fought under scipio in the
numantine war (133 b.c.) when he was still quite a youth; and it is
certain from horace that he lived on terms of the greatest intimacy, both
with him, laelius, and albinus. he is said to have possessed the house
which had been built at the public expense for the son of king antiochus,
and to have died at naples, where he was honoured with a public funeral,
in the forty-sixth year of his age. his position, at once independent and
unambitious (for he could not hold office in rome), gave him the best
possible chance of observing social and political life, and of this chance
he made the fullest use. he lived behind the scenes: he saw the corruption
prevalent in high circles; he saw also the true greatness of those who,
like scipio, stood aloof from it, and he handed down to imperishable
infamy each most signal instance of vice, whether in a statesman, as
lupus, [16] metellus, or albucius, or in a private person, as the glutton
gallonius.

it is possible that he now and then misapplied his pen to abuse his own
enemies or those of his friends, for we know that the honourable mucius
scaevola was violently attacked by him; [17] and there is a story that
being once lampooned in the theatre in a libellous manner, the poet sued
his detractor, but failed in obtaining damages, on the ground that he
himself had done the same to others. nevertheless, there can be no doubt
whatever that on the whole he nobly used the power he possessed, that his
trenchant pen was mainly enlisted on the side of patriotism, virtue, and
enlightenment, and that he lashed without mercy corruption, hypocrisy, and
ignorance. the testimony of horace to his worth, coming from one who
himself was not easily deceived, is entitled to the highest consideration;
[18] that of juvenal, though more emphatic, is not more weighty, [19] and
the opinion, blamed by quintilian, [20] that he should be placed above all
other poets, shows that his plain language did not hinder the recognition
of his moral excellence.

although a companion of the great, he was strictly popular in his tone. he
appealed to the great public, removed on the one hand from accurate
learning, on the other from indifference to knowledge. "_nec
doctissimis_," he says, [21] "_manium persium haec legere nolo, junium
congum volo._" and in another passage quoted by cicero, [22] he professes
to desire that his readers may be the tarentines, consentines, and
sicilians,--those, that is, whose latin grammar and spelling most needed
improvement. but we cannot extend this humility [23] to his more famous
political allusions. those at any rate would be nothing if not known to
the parties concerned; neither the poet's genius nor the culprit's guilt
could otherwise be brought home to the individual.

in one sense lucilius might be called a moderniser, for he strove hard to
enlarge the people's knowledge and views; but in another and higher sense
he was strictly national: luxury, bribery, and sloth, were to him the very
poison of all true life, and cut at the root of those virtues by which
alone rome could remain great. this national spirit caused him to be
preferred to horace by conservative minds in the time of tacitus, but it
probably made his critics somewhat over-indulgent. horace, with all his
admiration for him, cannot shut his eyes to his evident faults, [24] the
rudeness of his language, the carelessness of his composition, the habit
of mixing greek and latin words, which his zealous admirers construed into
a virtue, and, last but not least, the diffuseness inseparable from a
hasty draft which he took no trouble to revise. still his elegance of
language must have been considerable. pliny speaks of him as the first to
establish a severe criticism of style, [25] and the fragments reveal
beneath the obscuring garb of his uncouth hexameters, a terse and pure
idiom not unlike that of terence. his faults are numerous, [26] but do not
seriously detract from his value. the loss of his works must be considered
a serious one. had they been extant we should have found useful
information in his pictures of life and manners in a state of moral
transition, amusement in such pieces as his journal of a progress from
rome to capua, [27] and material for philological knowledge in his careful
distinctions of orthography and grammar.

as a favourable specimen of his style, it will be sufficient to quote his
definition of virtue:

  "virtus, albine, est pretium persolvere verum
  quis in versamur, quis vivimus rebus potesse.
  virtus est homini scire id quod quaeque habeat res.
  virtus scire homini rectum, utile, quid sit honestum,
  quae bona, quae mala item, quid inutile, turpe, inhonestum.
  virtus, quaerendae finem rei scire modumque;
  virtus divitiis pretium persolvere posse.
  virtus, id dare quod reipsa debetur honori,
  hostem esse atque inimicum hominum morumque malorum
  contra, defensorem hominum morumque bonorum;
  magnificare hos, his bene velle, his vivere amicum;
  commoda praeterea patriai prima putare,
  deinde parentum, tertia iam postremaque nostra."

we see in these lines a practical and unselfish standard--that of the
cultivated but still truly patriotic roman, admitting the necessity of
knowledge in a way his ancestors might have questioned, but keeping
steadily to the main points of setting a true price upon all human things,
and preferring the good of one's country to personal advantage. this is a
morality intelligible to all, and if it falls below the higher
enlightenment of modern, knowledge, it at least soars above the average
practice. we are informed [28] that lucilius did not spare his immediate
predecessors and contemporaries in literature any more than in politics.
he attacked accius for his unauthorised innovations in spelling, pacuvius
and ennius for want of a sustained level of dignity. his satire seems to
have ranged over the whole field of life, so far as it was known to him;
and though his learning was in no department deep, [29] it was sound so
far as it went, and was guided by natural good taste. he will always
retain an interest for us from the charming picture given by horace of his
daily life; how he kept his books beside him like the best of friends, as
indeed they were, and whatever he felt, thought, or saw, intrusted to
their faithful keeping, whence it comes that the man's life stands as
vividly before one's eyes as if it had been painted on a votive tablet.
then the way in which laelius and scipio unbent in his company, mere youth
as he was compared to them, gives us a pleasing notion of his social
gifts; he who could make the two grave statesmen so far forget their
decorum as to romp in the manner horace describes, must at least have been
gifted with contagious light-heartedness. this genial humour horace tried
with success to reproduce, but he is conscious of inferiority to the
master. in english literature dryden is the writer who most recalls him,
though rather in his higher than in his more sportive moods.




chapter viii.

the minor departments of poetry--the atellanae (pomponius and novius,
circ. 90 b.c.) and the epigram (ennius--catulus, 100 b.c.).


the last class of dramatic poets whom we shall mention in the first period
are the writers of _atellanae_. these entertainments originated at the
little town of atella, now st arpino, between capua and naples in the
oscan territory, and were at first composed in the oscan dialect. their
earliest cultivation at rome seems to date not long after 360 b.c., in
which year the etruscan histriones were first imported into rome. the
novelty of this amusement attracted the roman youths, and they began to
imitate both the etruscan dancers and the oscan performers, who had
introduced the atellane fables into rome. after the libellous freedom of
speech in which they at first indulged had been restrained by law, the
atellanae seem to have established themselves as a privileged form of
pleasantry, in which the young nobles could, without incurring the
disgrace of removal from their tribe or incapacity for military service,
indulge their readiness of speech and impromptu dramatic talent. [1]
during rather more than two centuries this custom continued, the
performance consisting of detached scenes without any particular
connection, but full of jocularity, and employing a fixed set of
characters. the language used may have been the oscan, but, considering
the fact that a knowledge of that dialect was not universal at rome, [2]
it was more probably the popular or plebeian latin interspersed with oscan
elements. no progress towards a literary form is observable until the time
of sulla, but they continued to receive a countenance from the authorities
that was not accorded to other forms of the drama. we find, for example,
that when theatrical representations were interdicted, an exception was
made in their favour. [3] though coarse and often obscene, they were
considered as consistent with gentlemanly behaviour; thus cicero, in a
well-known passage in one of his letters, [4] contrasts them with the
mimes, _secundum oenomaum accii non, ut olim solebat, atellanam, sed, ut
nunc fit, mimum introduxisti_; and valerius maximus implies that they did
not carry their humour to extravagant lengths, [5] but tempered it with
italian severity. from the few fragments that remain to us we should be
inclined to form a different opinion, and to suspect that national
partiality in contrasting them with the graecized form of the mimi kept
itself blind to their more glaring faults. the characters that oftenest
reappear in them are maccus, bucco, and pappus; the first of these is
prefixed to the special title, _e.g. maccus miles, maccus virgo_. he seems
to have been a personage with an immense head, who, corresponding to our
clown or harlequin, came in for many hard knocks, but was a general
favourite. pappus took the place of pantaloon, and was the general butt.

novius (circ. 100 b.c.), whom macrobius [6] calls _probatissimus
atellanarum scriptor_, was the first to reduce this species to the rules
of art, giving it a plot and a written dialogue. several fragments remain,
but for many centuries they were taken for those of naevius, whence great
confusion ensued. a better known writer is l. pomponius (90 b.c.) of
bononia, who flourished in the time of sulla, and is said to have
persuaded that cultured sensualist to compose atellanae himself. upwards
of thirty of his plays are cited; [7] but although a good many lines are
preserved, no fragments are long enough to give a good notion of his
style. the commendations, however, with which cicero, seneca, gellius, and
priscian load him, prove that he was classed with good writers. from the
list given below, it will be seen that the subjects were mostly, though
not always, from low life; some remind us of the regular comedies, as the
_syri_ and _dotata_. the old-fashioned ornaments of puns and alliteration
abound in him, as well as extreme coarseness. the fables, which were
generally represented after the regular play as an interlude or farce, are
mentioned by juvenal in two of his satires: [8]

  "urbicus exodio risum movet atellanae gestibus autonoes;"

and in his pretty description of a rustic fete--

                              "ipsa dierum
  festorum herboso colitur si quando theatro
  maiestas, tandemque redit ad pulpita notum
  exodium, cum personae pallentis hiatum
  in gremio matris formidat rusticus infans;
  aequales habitus illic, similemque videbis
  orchestram et populum...."

they endured a while under the empire, when we hear of a composer named
mummius, of some note, but in the general decline they became merged in
the pantomime, into which all kinds of dramatic art gradually converged.

if the atellanae were the most indigenous form of literature in which the
young nobles indulged, the different kinds of love-poem were certainly the
least in accordance with the roman traditions of art. nevertheless,
unattainable as was the spontaneous grace of the greek erotic muse, there
were some who aspired to cultivate her.

few kinds of verse more attracted the roman amateurs than the epigram.
there was something congenial to the roman spirit in the pithy distich or
tetrastich which formed so considerable an element in the "elegant
extracts" of alexandria. the term _epigram_ has altered its meaning with
the lapse of ages. in greek it signified merely an inscription
commemorative of some work of art, person, or event; its virtue was to be
short, and to be appropriate. the most perfect writer of epigrams in the
greek sense was simonides,--nothing can exceed the exquisite simplicity
that lends an undying charm to his effusions. the epigrams on leonides and
on marathon are well known. the metre selected was the elegiac, on account
of its natural pause at the close of the second line. the nearest approach
to such simple epigrams are the epitaphs of naevius, ennius, and
especially pacuvius, already quoted. this natural grace, however, was,
even in greek poetry, superseded by a more artificial style. the sparkling
epigram of plato addressed to a fair boy has been often imitated, and most
writers after him are not satisfied without playing on some fine thought,
or turning some graceful point; so that the epigram by little and little
approached the form which in its purest age the italian sonnet possessed.
in this guise it was cultivated with taste and brilliancy at alexandria,
callimachus especially being a finished master of it. the first roman
epigrammatists imitate the alexandrine models, and, making allowance for
the uncouth hardness of their rhythm, achieve a fair success. of the
epigrams of ennius, only the three already quoted remain. [9] three
authors are mentioned by aulus gellius [10] as having raised the latin
epigram to a level with anacreon in sweetness, point, and neatness. this
is certainly far too high praise. nor, even if it were so, can we forget
that the poems he quotes (presumably the best he could find) are obvious
imitations, if not translations, from the greek. the first is by q.
lutatius catulus, and dates about 100 b.c. it is entitled _ad theotimum_:

  "aufugit mi animus; credo, ut solet, ad theotimum
    devenit: sic est: perfugium illud habet.
  quid si non interdixem ne illuc fugitivum
    mitteret ad se intro, sed magis eiiceret?
  ibimus quaesitum: verum ne ipsi teneamur
    formido: quid ago? da, venus, consilium."

a more pleasing example of his style, and this time perhaps original, is
given by cicero. [11] it is on the actor roscius, who, when a boy, was
renowned for his beauty, and is favourably compared with the rising orb of
day:

  "constiteram exorientem auroram forte salutans,
    cum subito e laeva roscius exoritur.
  pace mihi liceat, caelestes, dicere vestra:
    mortalis visust pulcrior esse deo."

this piece, as may be supposed, has met with imitators both in french and
italian literature. a very similar _jeu d'esprit_ of porcius licinus is
quoted:

  "custodes ovium, teneraeque propaginis agnum,
    quaeritis ignem? ite huc: quaeritis? ignis homo est.
  si digito attigero, incendam silvam simul omnem,
    omne pecus: flamma est omnia quae video."

this porcius wrote also on the history of literature. some rather ill-
natured lines on terence are preserved in suetonius. [12] he there implies
that the young poet, with all his talent, could not keep out of poverty, a
taunt which we have good reason for disbelieving as well as disapproving.
two lines on the rise of poetry at rome deserve quotation--

  "poenico bello secundo musa pinnato gradu
  intulit se bellicosam romuli in gentem feram."

a certain pompilius is mentioned by varro as having epigrammatic tastes;
one distich that is preserved gives us no high notion of his powers--

  "pacvi [13] discipulus dicor: porro is fuit enni:
    ennius musarum: pompilius clueor."

lastly, valerius aedituus, who is only known by the short notices in varro
and gellius, wrote similar short pieces, two of which are preserved.

  ad pamphilam.

  "dicere cum conor curam tibi, pamphila, cordis,
    quid mi abs te quaeram? verba labris abeunt
  per pectus miserum manat subito mihi sudor.
    si tacitus, subidus: duplo ideo pereo."

  ad puerum philerota.

  "quid faculam praefers, phileros, qua nil opus nobis?
    ibimus, hoc lucet pectore flamma satis.
  illam non potis est vis saeva exstinguere venti,
    aut imber caelo candidus praecipitans.
  at contra, hunc ignem veneris, si non venus ipsa,
    nulla est quae possit vis alia opprimare."

we have quoted these pieces, not from their intrinsic merit, for they have
little or none, but to show the painful process by which latin
versification was elaborated. all these must be referred to a date at
least sixty years after ennius, and yet the rhythm is scarcely at all
improved. the great number of second-rate poets who wrought in the same
laboratory did good work, in so far that they made the technical part less
wearisome for poets like lucretius and catullus. with mechanical dexterity
taste also slowly improved by the competing effort of many ordinary minds;
but it did not make those giant strides which nothing but genius can
achieve. the later developments of the epigram will be considered in a
subsequent book.




chapter ix.

prose literature--history. fabius pictor--macer (210-80 b.c.).


there are nations among whom the imagination is so predominant that they
seem incapable of regarding things as they are. the literature of such
nations will always be cast in a poetical mould, even when it takes the
outward form of prose. of this class india is a conspicuous example. in
the opposite category stand those nations which, lacking imaginative
power, supply its place by the rich colouring of rhetoric, but whose
poetry, judged by the highest standard, does not rise above the sphere of
prose. modern france is perhaps the best example of this. the same is so
far true of ancient rome that she was unquestionably more productive of
great prose writers than of poets. her utilitarian and matter-of-fact
genius inclined her to approach the problems of thought and life from a
prosaic point of view. her perceptions of beauty were defective; her sense
of sympathy between man and nature (the deepest root of poetry) slumbered
until roused by a voice from without to momentary life. the aspirations
and destiny of the individual soul which had kindled the brightest light
of greek song, were in rome replaced by the sovereign claims of the state.
the visible city, throned on seven hills, the source and emblem of
imperial power, and that not ideal but actual, was a theme fitted to
inspire the patriot orator or historian, but not to create the finer
susceptibilities of the poet. we find in accordance with this fact, that
prose literature was approached, not by strangers or freedmen, but by
members of the noblest houses in rome. the subjects were given by the
features of national life. the wars that had gained dominion abroad, the
eloquence that had secured power at home, the laws that had knit society
together and made the people great; these were the elements on which prose
literature was based. its developments, though influenced by greece, are
truly national, and on them the roman character is indelibly impressed.
the first to establish itself was history. the struggles of the first
punic war had been chronicled in the rude verse of naevius; those of the
second produced the annals of fabius and cincius alimentus.

from the earliest period the romans had a clear sense of the value of
contemporary records. the _annales maximi_ or _commentarii pontificum_
contained the names of magistrates for each year, and a daily record [1]
of all memorable events from the regal times until the pontificate of p.
mucius scaevola (133 b.c.). the occurrences noted were, however, mostly of
a trivial character, as cato tells us in a fragment of his _origines_, and
as we can gather from the extracts found in livy. the _libri lintei_,
mentioned several times by livy, [2] were written on rolls of linen cloth,
and, besides lists of magistrates, contained many national monuments, such
as the treaty between rome and carthage, and the truce made with ardea and
gabii. similar notes were kept by the civil magistrates (_commentarii
consulares, libri praetorum, tabulae censoriae_) and stored up in the
various temples. the greater number of these records perished in the
capture of rome by the gauls, and when livy speaks of them as existing
later, he refers not to the originals, but to copies made after that
event. such yearly registers were continued to a late period. one of the
most important was discovered in the sixteenth century, embracing a list
of the great magistracies from 509 b.c. till the death of augustus, and
executed in the reign of tiberius. another source of history was the
family register kept by each of the great houses, and treasured with
peculiar care. it was probably more than a mere catalogue of actions
performed or honours gained, since many of the more distinguished families
preserved their records as witnesses of glories that in reality had never
existed, but were the invention of flattering chroniclers or clients.

the radical defect in the roman conception of history was its narrowness.
the idea of preserving and handing down truth for its own sake was foreign
to them. the very accuracy of their early registers was based on no such
high principle as this. it arose simply from a sense of the continuity of
the roman commonwealth, from national pride, and from considerations of
utility. the catalogue of prodigies, pestilences, divine visitations,
expiations and successful propitiatory ceremonies, of which it was chiefly
made up, was intended to show the value of the state religion, and to
secure the administration of it in patrician hands. it was indeed
praiseworthy that considerations so patriotic should at that rude period
have so firmly rooted themselves in the mind of the governing class; but
that their object was rather to consolidate their own power and advance
that of the city than to instruct mankind, is clear from the totally
untrustworthy character of the special gentile records; and when history
began to be cultivated in a literary way, we do not observe any higher
motive at work. fabius and cincius wrote in greek, partly, no doubt,
because in the unformed state of their own language it was easier to do
so; but that this was not in itself a sufficient reason is shown by the
enthusiasm with which not only their contemporary ennius, but their
predecessors livius and naevius, studied and developed the latin tongue.
livius and ennius worked at latin in order to construct a literary dialect
that should also be the speech of the people. fabius and cincius, we
cannot help suspecting, wrote in greek, because that was a language which
the people did _not_ understand.

belonging to an ancient house whose traditions were exclusive and
aristocratic, fabius (210 b.c.) addressed himself to the limited circle of
readers who were conversant with the greek tongue; to the people at large
he was at no pains to be intelligible, and he probably was as indifferent
to their literary, as his ancestors had been to their political, claims or
advantages. the branch to which he belonged derived its distinguishing
name from fabius pictor the grandfather of the historian, who, in 312 b.c.
painted the temple of salus, which was the oldest known specimen of roman
art, and existed, applauded by the criticism of posterity, until the era
of claudius. this single incident proves that in a period when roman
feeling as a rule recoiled from practising the arts of peace, members of
this intellectual _gens_ were already proficients in one of the proscribed
greek accomplishments, and taken into connection with the polished
cultivation of the claudii, and perhaps of other _gentes_, shows that in
their private life the aristocratic party were not so bigoted as for
political purposes they chose to represent themselves. [3] as to the value
of fabius's work we have no good means of forming an opinion. livy
invariably speaks of him with respect, as _scriptorum longe
antiquissimus_; and there can be little doubt that he had access to the
best existing authorities on his subject. besides the public chronicles
and the archives of his own house, he is said to have drawn on greek
sources. niebuhr, also, takes a high view of his merits; and the
unpretending form in which he clothed his work, merely a bare statement of
events without any attempt at literary decoration, inclines us to believe
that so far as national prejudices allowed, he endeavoured to represent
faithfully the facts of history.

of l. cincius alimentus (flor. 209 b.c.) we should he inclined to form a
somewhat higher estimate, from the fact that, when taken prisoner by
hannibal, he received greater consideration from him than almost any other
roman captive. he conversed freely with him, and informed him of the route
by which he had crossed the alps, and of the exact number of his invading
force. cincius was praetor in sicily 209 b.c. he thus had good
opportunities for learning the main events of the campaign. niebuhr [4]
says of him, "he was a critical investigator of antiquity, who threw light
on the history of his country by researches among its ancient monuments.
he proceeded in this work with no less honesty than diligence; [5] for it
is only in his fragments that we find a distinct statement of the early
relations between rome and latium, which in all the annals were
misrepresented from national pride. that cincius wrote a book on the old
roman calendar, we are told by macrobius; [6] that he examined into
ancient etruscan and roman chronology, is clear from livy." [7] the point
in which he differed from the other authorities most strikingly is the
date he assigns for the origin of the city; but niebuhr thinks that his
method of ascertaining it shows independent investigation. [8] cincius,
like fabius, began his work by a rapid summary of the early history of
rome, and detailed at full length only those events which had happened
during his own experience.

a third writer who flourished about the same time was c. acilius (circ.
184 b.c.), who, like the others, began with the foundation of the city,
and apparently carried his work down to the war with antiochus. he, too,
wrote in greek, [9] and was afterwards translated into latin by claudius
quadrigarius, [10] in which form he was employed by livy. aulus postumius
albinus, a younger contemporary of cato, is also mentioned as the author
of a greek history. it is very possible that the selection of the greek
language by all these writers was partly due to their desire to prove to
the greeks that roman history was worth studying; for the latin language
was at this time confined to the peninsula, and was certainly not studied
by learned greeks, except such as were compelled to acquire it by
relations with their roman conquerors. besides these authors, we learn
from polybius that the great scipio furnished contributions to history:
among other writings, a long greek letter to king philip is mentioned
which contained a succinct account of his spanish and african campaigns.
his son, and also scipio nasica, appear to have followed his example in
writing greek memoirs.

the creator of latin prose writing was cato (234-149 b.c.). in almost
every department he set the example, and his works, voluminous and varied,
retained their reputation until the close of the classical period. he was
the first thoroughly national author.

the character of the rigid censor is generally associated in our minds
with the contempt of letters. in his stern but narrow patriotism, he
looked with jealous eyes on all that might turn the citizens from a
single-minded devotion to the state. culture was connected in his mind
with greece, and her deleterious influence. the embassy of diogenes,
critolaus, and carneades, 155 b.c. had shown him to what uses culture
might be turned. the eloquent harangue pronounced in favour of justice,
and the equally eloquent harangue pronounced next day against it by the
same speaker without a blush of shame, had set cato's face like a flint in
opposition to greek learning. "i will tell you about those greeks," he
wrote in his old age to his son marcus, "what i discovered by careful
observation at athens, and how far i deem it good to skim through their
writings, for in no case should they be deeply studied. i will prove to
you that they are one and all, a worthless and intractable set. mark my
words, for they are those of a prophet: whenever that nation shall give us
its literature, it will corrupt everything." [11]

with this settled conviction, thus emphatically expressed at a time when
experience had shown the realization of his fears to be inevitable, and
when he himself had so far bent as to study the literature he despised,
the long and active public life of cato is in complete harmony. he is the
perfect type of an old roman. hard, shrewd, niggardly, and narrow-minded,
he was honest to the core, unsparing of himself as of others, scorning
every kind of luxury, and of inflexible moral rectitude. he had no respect
for birth, rank, fortune, or talent; his praise was bestowed solely on
personal merit. he himself belonged to an ancient and honourable house,
[12] and from it he inherited those harsh virtues which, while they
enforced the reverence, put him in conflict with the spirit, of the age.
no man could have set before himself a more uphill task than that which
cato struggled all his life vainly to achieve. to reconstruct the past is
but one step more impossible than to stem the tide of the present. if cato
failed, a greater than cato would not have succeeded. influences were at
work in rome which individual genius was powerless to resist. the
ascendancy of reason over force, though it were the noblest form that
force has ever assumed, was step by step establishing itself; and no
stronger proof of its victory could be found than that cato, despite of
himself, in his old age studied greek. we may smile at the deep-rooted
prejudice which confounded the pure glories of the old greek intellect
with the degraded puerilities of its unworthy heirs; but though cato could
not fathom the mind of greece, he thoroughly understood the mind of rome,
and unavailing as his efforts were, they were based on an unerring
comprehension of the true issues at stake. he saw that greece was unmaking
rome; but he did not see that mankind required that rome should be unmade.
it is the glory of men like scipio and ennius, that their large-
heartedness opened their eyes, and carried their vision beyond the horizon
of the roman world into that dimly-seen but ever expanding country in
which all men are brethren. but if from the loftiest point of view their
wide humanity obtains the palm, no less does cato's pure patriotism shed
undying radiance over his rugged form, throwing into relief its massive
grandeur, and ennobling rather than hiding its deformities.

we have said that cato's name is associated with the contempt of letters.
this is no doubt the fact. nevertheless, cato was by far the most original
writer that rome ever produced. he is the one man on whose vigorous mind
no outside influence had ever told. brought up at his father's farm at
tusculum, he spent his boyhood amid the labours of the plough. hard work
and scant fare toughened his sinews, and service under fabius in the
hannibalic war knit his frame into that iron strength of endurance, which,
until his death, never betrayed one sign of weakness or fatigue. a saying
of his is preserved [13]--"man's life is like iron; if you use it, it
wears away, if not, the rust eats it. so, too, men are worn away by hard
work; but if they do no work, rest and sloth do more injury than
exercise." on this maxim his own life was formed. in the intervals of
warfare, he did not relax himself in the pleasures of the city, but went
home to his plough, and improved his small estate. being soon well known
for his shrewd wit and ready speech, he rose into eminence at the bar; and
in due time obtained all the offices of state. in every position he made
many enemies, but most notably in his capacity of censor. no man was
oftener brought to trial. forty-four times he spoke in his own defence,
and every time he was acquitted. [14] as livy says, he wore his enemies
out, partly by accusing them, but still more by the pertinacity with which
he defended himself. [15] besides private causes, he spoke in many
important public trials and on many great questions of state: cicero [16]
had seen or heard of 150 orations by him; in one passage he implies that
he had delivered as many as lysias, _i.e._ 230. [17] even now we have
traces, certainly of 80, and perhaps of 13 more. [18] his military life,
which had been a series of successes, was brought to a close 190 b.c., and
from this time until his death, he appears as an able civil administrator,
and a vehement opponent of lax manners. in the year of his censorship (184
b.c.) plautus died. the tremendous vigour with which he wielded the powers
of this post stirred up a swarm of enemies. his tongue became more bitter
than ever. plutarch gives his portrait in an epigram.

  _pyrron, pandaketaen, glaukommaton, oude thanonta
  porkion eis aidaen persephonae dechetai._

here, at 85 years of age, [19] the man stands before us. we see the crisp,
erect figure, bristling with aggressive vigour, the coarse, red hair, the
keen, grey eyes, piercingly fixed on his opponent's face, and reading at a
glance the knavery he sought to hide; we hear the rasping voice, launching
its dry, cutting sarcasms one after another, each pointed with its sting
of truth; and we can well believe that the dislike was intense, which
could make an enemy provoke the terrible armoury of the old censor's
eloquence.

as has been said, he so far relaxed the severity of his principles as to
learn the greek language and study the great writers. nor could he help
feeling attracted to minds like those of thucydides and demosthenes, in
sagacity and earnestness so congenial to his own. nevertheless, his
originality is in nothing more conspicuously shown than in his method of
treating history. he struck a line of inquiry in which he found no
successor. the _origines_, if it had remained, would undoubtedly have been
a priceless storehouse of facts about the antiquities of italy. cato had
an enlarged view of history. it was not his object to magnify rome at the
expense of the other italian nationalities, but rather to show how she had
become their greatest, because their truest, representative. the divisions
of the work itself will show the importance he attached to an
investigation of their early annals. we learn from nepos that the first
book comprised the regal period; the second and third were devoted to the
origin and primitive history of each italian state; [20] the fourth and
fifth embraced the punic wars; the last two carried the history as far as
the praetorship of servius galba, cato's bold accusation of whom he
inserted in the body of the work. nepos, echoing the superficial canons of
his age, characterises the whole as showing industry and diligence, but no
learning whatever. the early myths were somewhat indistinctly treated.
[21] his account of the trojan immigration seems to have been the basis of
that of virgil, though the latter refashioned it in several points. [22]
his computation of dates, though apparently exact, betrays a mind
indifferent to the importance of chronology. the fragments of the next two
books are more copious. he tells us that gaul, then as now, pursued with
the greatest zeal military glory and eloquence in debate. [23] his notice
of the ligurians is far from complimentary. "they are all deceitful,
having lost every record of their real origin, and being illiterate, they
invent false stories and have no recollection of the truth." [24] he
hazards a few etymologies, which, as usual among roman writers, are quite
unscientific. graviscae is so called from its unhealthy climate (_gravis
aer_), praeneste from its conspicuous position on the mountains (_quia
montibus praestet_). a few scattered remarks on the food in use among
different tribes are all that remain of an interesting department which
might have thrown much light on ethnological questions. in the fourth
book, cato expresses his disinclination to repeat the trivial details of
the pontifical tables, the fluctuations of the market, the eclipses of the
sun and moon, &c. [25] he narrates with enthusiasm the self-devotion of
the tribune caedicius, who in the first punic war offered his life with
that of 400 soldiers to engage the enemy's attention while the general was
executing a necessary manoeuvre. [26] "the laconian leonides, who did the
same thing at thermopylae, has been rewarded by all greece for his virtue
and patriotism with all the emblems of the highest possible distinction--
monuments, statues, epigrams, histories; his deed met with their warmest
gratitude. but little praise has been given to our tribune in comparison
with his merits, though he acted just as the spartan did, and saved the
fortunes of the state." as to the title _origines_, it is possible, as
nepos suggests, that it arose from the first three books having been
published separately. it certainly is not applicable to the entire
treatise, which was a genuine history on the same scale as that of
thucydides, and no mere piece of antiquarian research. he adhered to truth
in so far as he did not insert fictitious speeches; he conformed to greek
taste so far as to insert his own. one striking feature in the later hooks
was his omission of names. no roman worthy is named in them. the reason of
this it is impossible to discover. fear of giving offence would be the
last motive to weigh with him. dislike of the great aristocratic houses
into whose hands the supreme power was steadily being concentrated, is a
more probable cause; but it is hardly sufficient of itself. perhaps the
omission was a mere whim of the historian. though this work obtained great
and deserved renown, yet, like its author, it was praised rather than
imitated. livy scarcely ever uses it; and it is likely that, before the
end of the first century a.d. the speeches were published separately, and
were the only part at all generally read. pliny, gellius, and servius, are
the authors who seem most to have studied it; of these pliny was most
influenced by it. the natural history, especially in its general
discussions, strongly reminds us of cato.

of the talents of cato as an orator something will be said in the next
section. his miscellaneous writings, though none of them are historical,
may be noticed here. quintilian [27] attests the many-sidedness of his
genius: "m. cato was at once a first-rate general, a philosopher, an
orator, the founder of history, the most thorough master of law and
agriculture." the work on agriculture we have the good fortune to possess;
or rather a redaction of it, slightly modernized and incomplete, but
nevertheless containing a large amount of really genuine matter. nothing
can be more characteristic than the opening sentences. we give a
translation, following as closely as possible the form of the original:
"it is at times worth while to gain wealth by commerce, were it not so
perilous; or by usury, were it equally honourable. our ancestors, however,
held, and fixed by law, that a thief should be condemned to restore
double, a usurer quadruple. we thus see how much worse they thought it for
a citizen to be a money-lender than a thief. again, when they praised a
good man, they praised him as a good farmer, or a good husbandman. men so
praised were held to have received the highest praise. for myself, i think
well of a merchant as a man of energy and studious of gain; but it is a
career, as i have said, that leads to danger and ruin. but farming makes
the bravest men, and the sturdiest soldiers, and of all sources of gain is
the surest, the most natural, and the least invidious, and those who are
busy with it have the fewest bad thoughts." the sententious and dogmatic
style of this preamble cannot fail to strike the reader; but it is
surpassed by many of the precepts which follow. some of these contain
pithy maxims of shrewd sense, _e.g._ "patrem familias vendacem non emacem
esse oportet." "ita aedifices ne villa fundum quaerat, neve fundus
villam." the virgilian prescription, "laudato ingentia rura: exiguam
colito," is said to be drawn from cato, though it does not exist in our
copies. the treatment throughout is methodical. if left by the author in
its present form it represents the daily jotting down of thoughts on the
subject as they occurred to him.

in two points the writer appears in an unfavourable light--in his love of
gain, and in his brutal treatment of his slaves. with him farming is no
mere amusement, nor again is it mere labour. it is primarily and
throughout a means of making money, and indeed the only strictly
honourable one. however, cato so far relaxed the strictness of this theory
that he became "an ardent speculator in slaves, buildings, artificial
lakes, and pleasure-grounds, the mercantile spirit being too strong within
him to rest satisfied with the modest returns of his estate." as regarded
slaves, the law considered them as chattels, and he followed the law to
the letter. if a slave grew old or sick he was to be sold. if the weather
hindered work he was to take his sleep then, and work double time
afterwards. "in order to prevent combinations among his slaves, their
master assiduously sowed enmities and jealousies between them. he bought
young slaves in their name, whom they were forced to train and sell for
his benefit. when supping with his guests, if any dish was carelessly
dressed, he rose from table, and with a leathern thong administered the
requisite number of lashes with his own hand." so pitilessly severe was
he, that a slave who had concluded a purchase without his leave, hung
himself to avoid his master's wrath. these incidents, some told by
plutarch, others by cato himself, show the inhuman side of roman life, and
make it less hard to understand their treatment of vanquished kings and
generals. for the other sex cato had little respect. women, he says,
should be kept at home, and no chaldaean or soothsayer be allowed to see
them. women are always running after superstition. his directions about
the steward's wife are as follows. they are addressed to the steward:--
"let her fear you. take care that she is not luxurious. let her see as
little as possible of her neighbours or any other female friends; let her
never invite them to your house; let her never go out to supper, nor be
fond of taking walks. let her never offer sacrifice; let her know that the
master sacrifices for the whole family; let her he neat herself, and keep
the country-house neat." several sacrificial details are given in the
treatise. we observe that they are all of the rustic order; the master
alone is to attend the city ceremonial. among the different industries
recommended, we are struck by the absence of wheat cultivation. the
vineyard and the pasture chiefly engage attention, though herbs and green
produce are carefully treated. the reason is to be sought in the special
nature of the treatise. it is not a general survey of agriculture, but
merely a handbook of cultivation for a particular farm, that of manlius or
mallius, and so probably unfit for wheat crops. other subjects, as
medicine, are touched on. but his prescriptions are confined to the rudest
simples, to wholesome and restorative diet, and to incantations. these
last have equal value assigned them with rational remedies. whether cato
trusted them may well be doubted. he probably gave in such cases the
popular charm-cure, simply from not having a better method of his own to
propose.

another series of treatises were those addressed to his son, in one of
which, that on medicine, he charitably accuses the greeks of an attempt to
kill all barbarians by their treatment, and specially the romans, whom
they stigmatise by the insulting name of _opici_. [28] "i forbid you, once
for all, to have any dealings with physicians." owing to their temperate
and active life, the romans had for more than five hundred years existed
without a physician within their walls. cato's hostility to the
profession, therefore, if not justifiable, was at least natural. he
subjoins a list of simples by which he kept himself and his wife alive and
in health to a green old age. [29] and observing that there are countless
signs of death, and none of health, he gives the chief marks by which a
man apparently in health may be noted as unsound. in another treatise, on
farming, also dedicated to his son, for whom he entertained a warm
affection, and over whose education he sedulously watched, he says,--"buy
not what you want, but what you must have; what you don't want is dear at
a farthing, and what you lack borrow from yourself." such is the homely
wisdom which gained for cato the proud title of _sapiens_, by which, says
cicero, [30] he was familiarly known. other original works, the product of
his vast experience, were the treatise on eloquence, of which the pith is
the following: "rem tene: verba sequentur;" "take care of the sense: the
sounds will take care of themselves." we can well believe that this
excellent maxim ruled his own conduct. the art of war formed the subject
of another volume; in this, too, he had abundant and faithful experience.
an attempt to investigate the principles of jurisprudence, which was
carried out more fully by his son, [31] and a short _carmen de moribus_ or
essay on conduct, completed the list of his paternal instructions. why
this was styled _carmen_ is not known. some think it was written in
saturnian verse, others that its concise and oracular formulas suggested
the name, since _carmen_ in old latin is by no means confined to verse. it
is from this that the account of the low estimation of poets in the early
republic is taken. besides these regular treatises we hear of letters,
[32] and _apophthegmata_, or pithy sayings, put together like those of
bacon from divers sources. in after times cato's own apophthegms were
collected for publication, and under the name of _catonis dicta_, were
much admired in the middle ages. we see that cato's literary labours were
encyclopaedic. in this wide and ambitious sphere he was followed by varro,
and still later by celsus. literary effort was now becoming general.
fulvius nobilior, the patron of ennius and adversary of cato, published
annals after the old plan of a calendar of years. cassius hemina and
calpurnius piso, who were younger contemporaries, continued in the same
track, and we hear of other minor historians. cassius is mentioned more
than once as "_antiquissimus auctor_," a term of compliment as well as
chronological reference. [33] of him niebuhr says: "he wrote about alba
according to its ancient local chronology, and synchronised the earlier
periods of rome with the history of greece. he treated of the age before
the foundation of rome, whence we have many statements of his about
siculian towns in latium. the archaeology of the towns seems to have been
his principal object. the fourth book of his work bore the title of
_punicum bellum posterius_, from which we infer that the last war with
carthage had not as yet broken out."

about this epoch flourished q. fabius maximus servilianus, who is known to
have written histories. he is supposed to be miscalled by cicero, [34]
fabius pictor, for cicero mentions a work in latin by the latter author,
whereas it is certain that the old fabius wrote only in greek. the best
authorities now assume that fabius maximus, as a clansman and admirer of
pictor, translated his book into latin to make it more widely known. the
new work would thus be indifferently quoted as fabius pictor or fabius
maximus.

l. calpurnius piso frugi censorius (cons. 133), well known as the
adversary of the gracchi, an eloquent and active man, and staunch adherent
of the high aristocratic party, was also an able writer of history. that
his conception of historical writing did not surpass that of his
predecessors the annalists, is probable from the title of his work; [35]
that he brought to bear on it a very different spirit seems certain from
the quotations in livy and dionysius. one of the select few, in breadth of
views as in position, he espoused the rationalistic opinions advocated by
the scipionic circle, and applied them with more warmth than judgment to
the ancient legends. grote, niebuhr, and others, have shown how
unsatisfactory this treatment is; illusion is lost without truth being
found; nevertheless, the man who first honestly applies this method,
though he may have ill success, makes an epoch in historical research.
cicero gives him no credit for style; his annals (he says) are written in
a barren way. [36] the reader who wishes to read niebuhr's interesting
judgment on his work and influence is referred to the _introductory
lectures on roman history_. in estimating the very different opinions on
the ancient authors given in the classic times, we should have regard to
the divers standards from time to time set up. cicero, for instance, has a
great fondness for the early poets, but no great love for the prose
writers, except the orators, nearly all of whom he loads with praise.
still, making allowance for this slight mental bias, his criticisms are of
the utmost possible value. in the augustan and early imperial times,
antiquity was treated with much less reverence. style was everything, and
its deficiency could not be excused. and lastly, under the antonines (and
earlier [37]), disgust at the false taste of the day produced an
irrational reaction in favour of the archaic modes of thought and
expression, so that gellius, for instance, extols the simplicity,
sweetness, or noble vigour of writings in which we, like cicero, should
see only jejune and rugged immaturity. [38] pliny speaks of piso as a
weighty author (_gravis auctor_), and pliny's penetration was not easily
warped by style or want of style. we may conclude, on the whole, that
piso, though often misled by his want of imagination, and occasionally by
inaccuracy in regard to figures, [39] brought into roman history a
rational method, not by any means so original or excellent as that of
cato, but more on a level with the capacities of his countrymen, and
infinitely more productive of imitation.

the study of greek rhetoric had by this time been cultivated at rome, and
the difficulty of composition being materially lightened [40] as well as
its results made more pleasing, we are not surprised to find a number of
authors of a somewhat more pretentious type. vennonius, clodius licinus,
c. fannius, and gellius are little more than names; all that is known of
them will be found in teuffel's repertory. they seem to have clung to the
title of annalist though they had outgrown the character. there are,
however, two names that cannot be quite passed over, those of sempronius
asellio and caelius antipater. the former was military tribune at numantia
(133 b.c.), and treated of that campaign at length, in his work. he was
killed in 99 b.c. [41] but no event later than the death of gracchus (121
b.c.) is recorded as from him. he had great contempt for the old
annalists, and held their work to be a mere diary so far as form went; he
professed to trace the motives and effects of actions, rather, however,
with the object of stimulating public spirit than satisfying a legitimate
thirst for knowledge. he had also some idea of the value of constitutional
history, which may be due to the influence of polybius, whose trained
intelligence and philosophic grasp of events must have produced a great
impression among those who knew or read him.

we have now mentioned three historians, each of whom brought his original
contribution to the task of narrating events. cato rose to the idea of
rome as the centre of an italian state; he held any account of her
institutions to be imperfect which did not also trace from their origin
those of the kindred nations; piso conceived the plan of reducing the
myths to historical probability, and asellio that of tracing the moral
causes that underlay outward movements. thus we see a great advance in
theory since the time, just a century earlier, when fabius wrote his
annals. we now meet with a new element, that of rhetorical arrangement. no
one man is answerable for introducing this. it was in the air of rome
during the seventh century, and few were unaffected by it. antipater is
the first to whom rhetorical ornament is attributed by cicero, though his
attainments were of a humble kind. [42] he was conspicuous for word
painting. scipio's voyage to africa was treated by him in an imaginative
theatrical fashion, noticed with disapproval by livy. [43] in other
respects he seems to have been trustworthy and to have merited the honour
he obtained of being abridged by j. brutus.

in the time of sulla we hear of several historians who obtained celebrity.
the first is claudius quadrigarius (fl. 100 b.c.). he differs from all his
predecessors by selecting as his starting-point the taking of rome by the
gauls. his reason for so doing does him credit, viz. that there existed no
documents for the earlier period. [44] he hurried over the first three
centuries, and as was usual among roman writers, gave a minute account of
his own times, inserting documents and speeches. so archaic was his style
that his fragments might belong to the age of cato. for this reason, among
others, gellius [45] (in whom they are found) greatly admires him. though
he outlived sulla, and therefore chronologically might be considered as
belonging to the ciceronian period, yet the lack of finish in his own and
his contemporaries' style, makes this the proper place to mention them.
the _period_, [46] as distinct from the mere stringing together of
clauses, was not understood even in oratory until gracchus, and in history
it was to appear still later. cicero never mentions claudius, nor valerius
antias (91 b.c.), who is often associated with him. this writer, who has
gained through livy's page the unenviable notoriety of being the most
lying of all annalists, nevertheless obtained much celebrity. the chief
cause of his deceptiveness was the fabrication of circumstantial
narrative, and the invention of exact numerical accounts. his work
extended from the first mythical stories to his own day, and reached to at
least seventy-five books. in his first decade livy would seem to have
followed him implicitly. then turning in his later books to better
authorities, such as polybius, and perceiving the immense discrepancies,
he realised how he had been led astray, and in revenge attacked antias
throughout the rest of his work. still the fact that he is quoted by livy
oftener than any other writer, shows that he was too well-known to be
neglected, and perhaps livy has exaggerated his defects.

l. cornelius sisenna, (119-67 b.c.), better known as a statesman and
grammarian, treated history with success. his daily converse with
political life, and his thoughtful and studious habits, combined to
qualify him for this department. he was a conscientious man, and tells how
he pursued his work continuously, lest if he wrote by starts and snatches,
he might pervert the reader's mind. his style, however, suffered by this,
he became prolix; this apparently is what fronto means when he says
"_scripsit longinque_." to later writers he was interesting from his
fondness for archaisms. even in the senate he could not drop this affected
habit. alone of all the fathers he said _adsentio_ for _adsentior_, and
such phrases as "_vellicatim aut sultuatim scribendo_" show an absurd
straining after quaintness.

c. licinius macer (died 73 b.c.) the father of the poet calvus, was the
latest annalist of rome. cicero, who was his enemy, and his judge in the
trial which cost him his life, criticises his defects both as orator and
historian, with severity. livy, too, implies that he was not always
trustworthy ("quaesita ea propriae familiae laus leviorem auctorem facit,"
[47]) when the fame of his _gens_ was in question, but on many points he
quotes him with approval, and shows that he sought for the best materials,
_e.g._ he drew from the _lintei libri_, [48] the books of the magistrates,
[49] the treaty with ardea, [50] and where he differed from the general
view, he gave his reasons for it.

the extent of his researches is not known, but it seems likely that, alone
of roman historians, he did not touch on the events of his day, the latest
speech to which reference is made being the year 196 b.c. as he was an
orator, and by no means a great one, being stigmatised as "loquacious" by
cicero, it is probable that his history suffered from a rhetorical
colouring.

in reviewing the list of historians of the ante-classical period, we
cannot form any high opinion of their merits. fabius, cincius, and cato,
who are the first, are also the greatest. the others seem to have gone
aside to follow out their own special views, without possessing either
accuracy of knowledge or grasp of mind sufficient to unite them with a
general comprehensive treatment. the simultaneous appearance of so many
writers of moderate ability and not widely divergent views, is a witness
to the literary activity of the age, but does not say much for the force
of its intellectual creations.

note.--the fragments of the historians have been carefully collected and
edited with explanations and lists of authorities by peter. (_veterum
historicorum romanorum relliquiae_. lipsiae, 1870.)


appendix.

_on the annales pontificum._
(chiefly from _les annales des pontifes_, le clerc.)

the _annales_, though not literature in the proper sense, were so
important, as forming materials for it, that it may be well to give a
short account of them. they were called _pontificum_, _maximi_, and
sometimes _publici_, to distinguish them from the _annales_ of other
towns, of families, or of historical writers. the term _annales_, we may
note _en passant_, was ordinarily applied to a narrative of facts
preceding one's own time, _historiae_ being reserved for a contemporary
account (gell. v. 8). but this of course was after its first sense was
lost. in the oldest times, the pontifices, as they were the lawyers, were
in like manner the historians of rome (cic. de or. ii. 12). cicero and
varro repeatedly consulted their records, which cicero dates from the
origin of the city, but livy only from aneus martius (i. 32). servius,
apparently confounding them with the _fasti_, declares that they put down
the events of every day (ad ac. i. 373); and that they were divided into
eighty books. sempronius asellio (gell. v. 18) says they mention _bellum
quo initum consule, et quo modo confectum, et quis triumphans introierit_,
and cato ridicules the meagreness of their information. nevertheless it
was considered authentic. cicero found the eclipse of the year 350 duly
registered; virgil and ovid drew much of their archaeological lore
(_annalibus eruta priscis_, ov. fast i. 7.) and livy his lists of
prodigies from them. besides these marvellous facts, others were doubtless
noticed, as new laws, dedication of temples or monuments, establishment of
colonies, deaths of great men, erection of statues, &c.; but all with the
utmost brevity. _unam dicendi laudem putant esse brevitatem_ (de or. ii.
12). sentences occur in livy which seem excerpts from them, _e.g._ (ii.
1).--_his consulibus fidenae obssesae, crustumina capta, praeneste ab
latinis ad romanos descivit_. varro, in enumerating the gods whose altars
were consecrated by tatius, says (l. l. v. 101), _ut annales veteres
nostri dicunt_, and then names them. pliny also quotes them expressly, but
the word _vetustissimi_ though they make it probable that the pontifical
annals are meant, do not establish it beyond dispute (plin. xxxiii. 6,
xxxiv. 11).

it is probable, as has been said in this work, that the _annales
pontificum_ were to a great extent, though not altogether, destroyed in
the gallic invasion. but rome was not the only city that had annales.
probably all the chief towns of the oscan, sabine, and umbrian territory
had them. cato speaks of antemna as older than rome, no doubt from its
records. varro drew from the archives of tusculum (l. l. vi. 16),
praeneste had its pontifical annals (cic de div. ii. 41), and anagnia its
_libri lintei_ (fronto, ep. ad ant. iv. 4). etruria beyond question
possessed an extensive religious literature, with which much history must
have been mingled. and it is reasonable to suppose, as livy implies, that
the educated romans were familiar with it. from this many valuable facts
would be preserved. when the romans captured a city, they brought over its
gods with them, and it is possible, its sacred records also, since their
respect for what was religious or ancient, was not limited to their own
nationality, but extended to most of those peoples with whom they were
brought in contact. from all these considerations it is probable that a
considerable portion of historic record was preserved after the burning of
the city, whether from the annals themselves, or from portions of them
inscribed on bronze erstone, or from those of other states, which was
accessible to, and used by cato, polybius, varro, cicero, and verrius
flaccus. it is also probable that these records were collected into a
work, and that this work, while modernized by its frequent revisions,
nevertheless preserved a great deal of original and genuine annalistic
chronicle.

the _annales_ must be distinguished from the _libri pontificum_, which
seem to have been a manual of the _jus pontificale_. cicero places them
between the _jus civile_ and the twelve tables (de or. i. 43.) the _libri
pontificii_ may have been the same, but probably the term, when correctly
used, meant the ceremonial ritual for the _sacerdotes_, _flamines_, &c.
this general term included the more special ones of _libri sacrorum_,
_sacerdotum_, _haruspicini_, &c. some have confounded with the _annales_ a
different sort of record altogether, the _indigitamenta_, or ancient
formulae of prayer or incantation, and the _axamenta_, to which class the
song of the arval brothers is referred.

as to the amount of historical matter contained in the annals, it is
impossible to pronounce with confidence. their falsification through
family and patrician pride is well known. but the earliest historians must
have possessed sufficient insight to distinguish the obviously fabulous.
we cannot suspect cato of placing implicit faith in mythical accounts. he
was no friend to the aristocratic families or their records, and took care
to check them by the rival records of other italian tribes. sempronius
asellio, in a passage already alluded to (ap. gell. v. 18), distinguishes
the annalistic style as puerile (_fabulas pueris narrare_); the historian,
he insists, should go beneath the surface, and understand what he relates.
on comparing the early chronicles of rome with those of st bertin and st
denys of france, there appears no advantage in a historical point of view
to be claimed by the latter; both contain many real events, though both
seek to glorify the origin of the nation and its rulers by constant
instances of divine or saintly intervention.




chapter x.

the history of oratory before cicero.


as the spiritual life of a people is reflected in their poetry, so their
living voice is heard in their oratory. oratory is the child of freedom.
under the despotisms of the east it could have no existence; under every
despotism it withers. the more truly free a nation is, the greater will
its oratory be. in no country was there a grander field for the growth of
oratorical genius than in rome. the two countries that approach nearest to
it in this respect are beyond doubt athens and england. in both eloquence
has attained its loftiest height, in the one of popular, in the other of
patrician excellence. the eloquence of demosthenes is popular in the
noblest sense. it is addressed to a sovereign people who knew that they
were sovereign. neither to deliberative nor to executive did they for a
moment delegate that supreme power which it delighted them to exercise. he
that had a measure or a bill to propose had only to persuade them that it
was good, and the measure passed, the bill became law. but the audience he
addressed, though a popular, was by no means an ordinary one. it was
fickle and capricious to a degree exceeding that of all other popular
assemblies; it was critical, exacting, intellectual, in a still higher
degree. no audience has been more swayed by passion; none has been less
swayed by the pretence of it. always accessible to flattery, athens counts
as her two greatest orators the two men who never stooped to flatter her.
the regal tones of pericles, the prophetic earnestness of demosthenes, in
the response which each met, bear witness to the greatness of those who
heard them. even cleon owed his greatest triumphs to the plainness with
which he inveighed against the people's faults. intolerant of inelegance
and bombast, the athenians required not only graceful speech, but speech
to the point. hence demosthenes is of all ancient orators the most
business-like. of all ancient orators, it has been truly said he would
have met with the best hearing from the house of commons. nevertheless
there is a great difference between athenian and english eloquence. the
former was exclusively popular; the latter, in the strictest sense, is
hardly popular at all. the dignified representatives of our lower house
need no such appeals to popular passion as the athenian assembly required;
only on questions of patriotism or principle would they be tolerated.
still less does emotion govern the sedate and masculine eloquence of our
upper house, or the strict and closely-reasoned pleadings of our courts of
law. its proper field is in the addresses of a popular member to one of
the great city constituencies. the best speeches addressed to hereditary
legislators or to elected representatives necessarily involve different
features from those which characterised orations addressed directly to the
entire nation assembled in one place. if oratory has lost in fire, it has
gained in argument. in its political sphere, it shows a clearer grasp of
the public interest, a more tenacious restriction to practical issues; in
its judicial sphere, a more complete abandonment of prejudice and passion,
and a subordination, immeasurably greater than at athens, to the authority
of written law.

let us now compare the general features of greek and english eloquence
with those of rome. roman eloquence had this in common with greek, that it
was genuinely popular. in their comitia the people were supreme. the
orator who addressed them must be one who by passion could enkindle
passion, and guide for his own ends the impulses of a vast multitude. but
how different was the multitude! fickle, impressionable, vain; patriotic
too in its way, and not without a rough idea of justice. so far like that
of greece; but here the resemblance ends. the mob of rome, for in the
times of real popular eloquence it had come to that, was rude, fierce,
bloodthirsty: where athens called for grace of speech, rome demanded
vehemence; where athens looked for glory or freedom, rome looked for
increase of dominion, and the wealth of conquered kingdoms for her spoil.
that in spite of their fierce and turbulent audience the great roman
orators attained to such impressive grandeur, is a testimony to the
greatness of the senatorial system which reared them. in some respects the
eloquence of rome bears greater resemblance to that of england. for
several centuries it was chiefly senatorial. the people intrusted their
powers to the senate, satisfied that it acted for the best; and during
this period eloquence was matured. that special quality, so well named by
the romans _gravitas_, which at athens was never reached, but which has
again appeared in england, owed its development to the august discipline
of the senate. well might cineas call this body an assembly of kings.
never have patriotism, tradition, order, expediency, been so powerfully
represented as there; never have change, passion, or fear had so little
place. we can well believe that every effective speech began with the
words, so familiar to us, _maiores nostri voluerunt_, and that it ended as
it had begun. the aristocratic stamp necessarily impressed on the debates
of such an assembly naturally recalls our own house of lords. but the
freedom of personal invective was far wider than modern courtesy would
tolerate. and, moreover, the competency of the senate to decide questions
of peace or war threw into its discussions that strong party spirit which
is characteristic of our lower house. thus the senatorial oratory of rome
united the characteristics of that of both our chambers. it was at once
majestic and vehement, patriotic and personal, proud of traditionary
prestige, but animated with the consciousness of real power.

in judicial oratory the romans, like the greeks, compare unfavourably with
us. with more eloquence they had less justice. nothing sets antiquity in a
less prepossessing light than a study of its criminal trials; nothing
seems to have been less attainable in these than an impartial sifting of
evidence. the point of law is obscured among overwhelming considerations
from outside. if a man is clearly innocent, as in the case of roscius, the
enmity of the great makes it a severe labour to obtain an acquittal; if he
is as clearly guilty (as cluentius would seem to have been), a skilful use
of party weapons can prevent a conviction. [1] the judices in the public
trials (which must be distinguished from civil causes tried in the
praetor's court) were at first taken exclusively from the senators.
gracchus (122 b.c.) transferred this privilege to the equites; and until
the time of sulla, who once more reinstated the senatorial class (81
b.c.), fierce contests raged between the two orders. pompey (55 b.c.),
following an enactment of cotta (70 b.c.), threw the office open to the
three orders of senators, knights, and tribuni aerarii, but fixed a high
property qualification. augustus added a fourth _decuria_ from the lower
classes, and caligula a fifth, so that quintilian could speak of a juryman
as ordinarily a man of little intelligence and no legal or general
knowledge. [2]

this would be of comparatively small importance if a presiding judge of
lofty qualifications guided, as with us, the minds of the jury through the
mazes of argument and sophistry, and set the real issue plainly before
them. but in rome no such prerogative rested with the presiding judge, [3]
who merely saw that the provisions of the law under which the trial took
place were complied with. the judges, or rather jurors, were, in rome as
in athens, [4] both from their number and their divergent interests, open
to influences of prejudice or corruption, only too often unscrupulously
employed, from which our system is altogether exempt. in the later
republican period it was not, of course, ignorance (the jurors being
senators or equites) but bribery or partisanship that disgraced the
decisions of the bench. senator and eques unceasingly accused each other
of venality, and each was beyond doubt right in the charge he made. [5] in
circumstances like these it is evident that dexterous manipulation or
passionate pleading must take the place of legitimate forensic oratory.
magnificent, therefore, as are the efforts of the great speakers in this
field, and nobly as they often rise above the corrupt practice of their
time, it is impossible to shut our eyes to the iniquities of the
procedure, and to help regretting that talent so glorious was so often
compelled either to fail or to resort to unworthy methods of success.

at rome public speaking prevailed from the first. in every department of
life it was necessary for a man to express in clear and vigorous language
the views he recommended. not only the senator or magistrate, but the
general on the field of battle had to be a speaker. on his return from the
campaign eloquence became to him what strategy had been before. it was the
great path to civil honours, and success was not to be won without it.
there is little doubt that the romans struck out a vein of strong native
eloquence before the introduction of greek letters. readiness of speech is
innate in the italians as in the french, and the other qualities of the
romans contributed to enhance this natural gift. few remains of this
native oratory are left, too few to judge by. we must form our opinion
upon that of cicero, who, basing his judgment on its acknowledged
political effects, pronounces strongly in its favour. the measures of
brutus, of valerius poplicola, and others, testify to their skill in
oratory; [6] and the great honour in which the orator was always held, [7]
contrasting with the low position accorded to the poet, must have produced
its natural result. but though the practice of oratory was cultivated it
was not reduced to an art. technical treatises were the work of greeks,
and romans under greek influence. in the early period the "spoken word"
was all-important. even the writing down of speeches after delivery was
rarely, if ever, resorted to. the first known instance occurs so late as
the war with pyrrhus, 280 b.c., when the old censor appius committed his
speech to writing, which cicero says that he had read. the only exception
to this rule seems to have been the funeral orations, which may have been
written from the first, but were rarely published owing to the youth of
those who delivered them. the aspirant to public honours generally began
his career by composing such an oration, though in later times a public
accusation was a more favourite _debut_. besides appius's; speech, we hear
of one by fabius cunctator, and of another by metellus, and we learn from
ennius that in the second punic war (204 b.c.) m. cornelius cethegus
obtained the highest renown for his persuasive eloquence.

  "additur orator cornelius suaviloquenti
  ore cethegus ... is dictus popularibus olim ...
  flos delibatus populi suadaeque medulla." [8]

the first name on which we can pronounce with confidence is that of cato.
this great man was the first orator as he was the greatest statesman of
his time. cicero [9] praises him as dignified in commendation, pitiless in
sarcasm, pointed in phraseology, subtle in argument. of the 150 speeches
extant in cicero's time there was not one that was not stocked with
brilliant and pithy sayings; and though perhaps they read better in the
shape of extracts, still all the excellences of oratory were found in them
as a whole; and yet no one could be found to study them. perhaps cicero's
language betrays the warmth of personal admiration, especially as in a
later passage of the same dialogue [10] he makes atticus dissent
altogether from his own view. "i highly approve (he says) of the speeches
of cato as compared with those of his own date, for though quite
unpolished they imply some original talent ... but to speak of him as an
orator equal to lysias would indeed be pardonable irony if we were in
jest, but you cannot expect to approve it seriously to me and brutus." no
doubt atticus's judgment is based on too high a standard, for high finish
was impossible in the then state of the language. still cato wrote
probably in a designedly rude style through his horror of greek
affectation. he is reported to have said in his old age (150 b.c.),
"_caussurum illustrium quascunque defendi nunc cum maxime conficio
orationes_," [11] and these written speeches were no doubt improvements on
those actually delivered, especially as valerius maximus says of his
literary labours, [12] "_cato graecis literis erudiri concupivit, quam
sero inde cognoscimus quod etiam latinas paene iam senex didicerit._" his
eloquence extended to every sort; he was a successful _patronus_ in many
private trials; he was a noted and most formidable accuser; in public
trials we find him continually defending himself, and always with success;
as the advocate or opponent of great political measures in the senate or
assembly he was at his greatest. many titles of deliberative speeches
remain, _e.g._ "_de rege attalo et vectigalibus asiae_," "_ut plura aera
equestria fierent_," "_aediles plebis sacrosanctos esse_," "_de dote_" (an
attack upon the luxury of women), and others. his chief characteristics
were condensed force, pregnant brevity, strong common sense, galling
asperity. his orations were neglected for near a century, but in the
claudian era began to be studied, and were the subjects of commentary
until the time of servius, who speaks of his periods as ill-balanced and
unrhythmical (_confragosa_). [13] there is a most caustic fragment
preserved in fronto [14] taken from the speech _de sumptu suo_,
recapitulating his benefits to the state, and the ingratitude of those who
had profited by them; and another from his speech against minucius
thermus, who had scourged ten men for some trivial offence [15] which in
its sarcasm, its vivid and yet redundant language, recalls the manner of
cicero.

in cato's time we hear of ser. fulvius and l. cotta, scipio africanus and
sulpicius gallus, all of whom were good though not first-rate speakers. a
little later laelius and the younger scipio (185-129 b.c.), whose speeches
were extant in the time of cicero [16] and their contemporaries, followed
cato's example and wrote down what they had delivered. it is not clear
whether their motive was literary or political, but more probably the
latter, as party feeling was so high at rome that a powerful speech might
do good work afterwards as a pamphlet. [17] from the passages of scipio
aemilianus which we possess, we gather that he strove to base his style on
greek models. in one we find an elaborate dilemma, with a taunting
question repeated after each deduction; in another we find greek terms
contemptuously introduced much as they are centuries after in juvenal; in
another we have a truly patrician epigram. being asked his opinion about
the death of gracchus, and replying that the act was a righteous one, the
people raised a shout of defiance,--_taceant, inquit, quibus italia
noverca non mater est, quos ego sub corona vendidi_--"be silent, you to
whom italy is a stepdame not a mother, whom i myself have sold at the
hammer of the auctioneer."

laelius, surnamed _sapiens_, or the philosopher (cons. 140), is well known
to readers of cicero as the chief speaker in the exquisite dialogue on
friendship, and to readers of horace as the friend of scipio and lucilius.
[18] of his relative excellence as an orator, cicero speaks with caution.
[19] he mentions the popular preference for laelius, but apparently his
own judgment inclines the other way. "it is the manner of men to dislike
one man excelling in many things. now, as africanus has no rival in
martial renown, though laelius gained credit by his conduct of the war
with viriathus, so as regards genius, learning, eloquence, and wisdom,
though both are put in the first rank, yet all men are willing to place
laelius above scipio." it is certain that laelius's style was much less
natural than that of scipio. he affected an archaic vocabulary and an
absence of ornament, which, however, was a habit too congenial at all
times to the roman mind to call down any severe disapproval. what laelius
lacked was force. on one occasion a murder had been committed in the
forest of sila, which the consuls were ordered to investigate. a company
of pitch manufacturers were accused, and laelius undertook their defence.
at its conclusion the consuls decided on a second hearing. a few days
after laelius again pleaded, and this time with an elegance and
completeness that left nothing to be desired. still the consuls were
dissatisfied. on the accused begging laelius to make a third speech, he
replied: "out of consideration for you i have done my best. you should now
go to ser. galba, who can defend you with greater warmth and vehemence
than i." galba, from respect to laelius, was unwilling to undertake the
case; but, having finally agreed, he spent the short time that was left in
getting it by heart, retiring into a vaulted chamber with some highly
educated slaves, and remaining at work till after the consuls had taken
their seat. being sent for he at last came out, and, as rutilius the
narrator and eye-witness declared, with such a heightened colour and
triumph in his eyes that he looked like one who had already won his cause.
laelius himself was present. the advocate spoke with such force and weight
that scarcely an argument passed unapplauded. not only were the accused
released, but they met on all hands with sympathy and compassion. cicero
adds that the slaves who had helped in the consultation came out of it
covered with bruises, such was the vigour of body as well as mind that a
roman brought to bear on his case, and on the unfortunate instruments of
its preparation. [20]

galba (180-136 b.c.?) was a man of violence and bad faith, not for a
moment to be compared to laelius. his infamous cruelty to the lusitanians,
one of the darkest acts in all history, has covered his name with an
ineffaceable stain. cato at eighty-five years of age stood forth as his
accuser, but owing to his specious art, and to the disgrace of rome, he
was acquitted. [21] cicero speaks of him as _peringeniosus sed non satis
doctus_, and says that he lacked perseverance to improve his speeches from
a literary point of view, being contented with forensic success. yet he
was the first to apply the right sort of treatment to oratorical art; he
introduced digressions for ornament, for pathos, for information; but as
he never re-wrote his speeches, they remained unfinished, and were soon
forgotten--_hanc igitur ob caussum videtur laelii mens spirare etiam in
scriptis, galbae autem vis occidisse_.

laelius had embodied in his speeches many of the precepts of the stoic
philosophy. he had been a friend of the celebrated panaetius (186-126
b.c.) of rhodes, to whose lectures he sent his own son-in-law, and
apparently others too. eloquence now began to borrow philosophic
conceptions; it was no longer merely practical, but admitted of
illustration from various theoretical sources. it became the ambition of
cultivated men to fuse enlightened ideas into the substance of their
oratory. instances of this are found in sp. mummius, aemilius lepidus, c.
fannius, and the augur mucius scaevola, and perhaps, though it is
difficult to say, in carbo and the two gracchi. these are the next names
that claim our notice.

carbo (164-119 b.c.), the supporter first of the gracchi, and then of
their murderers, was a man of the most worthless character, but a bold
speaker, and a successful patron. in his time the _quaestiones perpetuae_
[22] were constituted, and thus he had an immense opportunity of enlarging
his forensic experience. he gained the reputation of being the first
pleader of his day; he was fluent, witty, and forcible, and was noted for
the strength and sweetness of his voice. tacitus also mentions him with
respect in his dialogue _de oratoribus_. [23]

the two gracchi were no less distinguished as orators than as champions of
the oppressed. tiberius (169-133 b.c.) served his first campaign with
scipio in africa, and was present at the fall of carthage. his personal
friendship for the great soldier was cemented by scipio's union with his
only sister. the father of gracchus was a man of sterling worth and
considerable oratorical gifts; his mother's virtue, dignity, and wisdom
are proverbial. her literary accomplishments were extremely great; she
educated her sons in her own studies, and watched their progress with more
than a preceptor's care. the short and unhappy career of this virtuous but
imprudent man is too well known to need allusion here; his eloquence alone
will be shortly noticed. it was formed on a careful study of greek
authors. among his masters was diophanes of mitylene, who dwelt at rome,
and paid the penalty of his life for his friendship for his pupil.
tiberius's character was such as to call for the strongest expressions of
reverence even from those who disapproved his political conduct. cicero
speaks of him as _homo sanctissimus_, and velleius paterculus says of him,
"_vita innocentissimus, ingenio florentissimus, proposito sanctissimus,
tantis denique ornatus virtutibus, quantas perfecta et natura et industria
mortalis conditio recipit_." his appearance formed an epoch in eloquence.
"the gracchi employed a far freer and easier mode of speech than any of
their predecessors." [24] this may be accounted for partly through the
superiority of their inherited talent and subsequent education, but is due
far more to the deep conviction which stirred their heart and kindled
their tongue. cato alone presents the spectacle of a man deeply impressed
with a political mission and carrying it into the arena of political
conflict, but the inspiration of gracchus was of a far higher order than
that of the harsh censor. it was in its origin moral, depending on the
eternal principles of right and wrong, not on the accident of any
particular state or party in it. hence the loftiness of his speech, from
which sarcasm and even passion were absent. in estimating the almost ideal
character of the enthusiasm which fired him we cannot forget that his
mother was the daughter of scipio, of him who believed himself the special
favourite of heaven, and the communicator of divinely sent ideas to the
world. unhappily we have no fragments of the orations of gracchus; the
more brilliant fame of his brother has eclipsed his literary renown, but
we may judge of their special features by those of their author's
character, and be sure that while lacking in genius they were temperate,
earnest, pure, and classical. in fact the gracchi may he called the
founders of classical latin. that subdued power whose subtle influence
penetrates the mind and vanquishes the judgment is unknown in literature
before them. whenever it appears it marks the rise of a high art, it
answers to the _vis temperata_ which horace so warmly commends. the
younger son of cornelia, c. gracchus (154-121 b.c.), was of a different
temper from his brother. he was less of the moralist, more of the artist.
his feeling was more intense but less profound. his brother's loyalty had
been to the state alone; his was given partly to the state, partly to the
shade of his brother. in nearly every speech, in season and out of season,
he denounced his murder. "_pessimi_ tiberium meum fratrem, optimum virum,
interfecerunt." such is the burden of his eloquence. if in tiberius we see
the impressive calmness of reasoned conviction, in caius we see the
splendid impetuosity of chivalrous devotion. and yet caius was, without
doubt, the greater statesman of the two. the measures, into which his
brother was as it were forced, were by him well understood and
deliberately planned. they amounted to nothing less than a subversion of
the existing state. the senate destroyed meant gracchus sovereign. under
the guise of restoring to the people their supreme power, he paved the way
for the long succession of tyrants that followed. his policy mingled
patriotism and revenge. the corruption and oppression that everywhere
marked the oligarchical rule roused his just indignation; the death of his
brother, the death he foresaw in store for himself, stirred him into
unholy vengeance. many of his laws were well directed. the liberal
attitude he assumed towards the provinces, his strong desire to satisfy
the just claims of the italians to citizenship, his breaking down the
exclusive administration of justice, these are monuments of his far-seeing
statesmanship. but his vindictive legislation with regard to popillius
laenas, and to octavius (from which, however, his mother's counsel finally
deterred him), and above all his creation of the curse of rome, a hungry
and brutal proletariate, by largesses of corn, present his character as a
public man in darker colours. as mommsen says, "right and wrong, fortune
and misfortune, were so inextricably blended in him that it may well
beseem history in this case to reserve her judgment." [25] the discord of
his character is increased by the story that an inward impulse dissuaded
him at first from public life, that agreeably to its monitions he served
as quaestor abroad, and pursued for some years a military career; but
after a time his brother's spirit haunted him, and urged him to return to
rome and offer his life upon the altar of the great cause. this was the
turning-point of his career. he returned suddenly, and from that day
became the enemy of the senate, the avenger of his brother, and the
champion of the multitude. his oratory is described as vehement beyond
example; so carried away did he become, that he found it necessary to have
a slave behind him on the rostra, who, by playing a flute, should recall
him to moderation. [26] cicero, who strongly condemned the man, pays the
highest tribute to his genius, saying in the brutus: "of the loftiest
talent, of the most burning enthusiasm, carefully taught from boyhood, he
yields to no man in richness and exuberance of diction." to which brutus
assents, adding, "of all our predecessors he is the only one whose works i
read." cicero replies, "you do right in reading him; latin literature has
lost irreparably by his early death. i know not whether he would not have
stood above every other name. his language is noble, his sentiments
profound, his whole style grave. his works lack the finishing touch; many
are admirably begun, few are thoroughly complete. he of all speakers is
the one that should be read by the young, for not only is he fit to
sharpen talent, but also to feed and nourish a natural gift." [27]

one of the great peculiarities of ancient eloquence was the frequent
opportunity afforded for self-recommendation or self-praise. that good
taste or modesty which shrinks from mentioning its own merits was far less
cultivated in antiquity than now. men accepted the principle not only of
acting but of speaking for their own advantage. this gave greater zest to
a debate on public questions, and certainly sharpened the orator's powers.
if a man had benefited the state he was not ashamed to blazon it forth; if
another in injuring the state had injured him, he did not altogether
sacrifice personal invective to patriotic indignation. [28] the frequency
of accusations made this "art of self-defence" a necessity--and there can
be no doubt the roman people listened with admiration to one who was at
once bold and skilful enough to sound his own praises well. cicero's
excessive vanity led him to overdo his part, and to nauseate at times even
well-disposed hearers. from the fragments of gracchus' speeches that
remain (unhappily very few) we should gather that in asserting himself he
was without a rival. the mixture of simplicity and art removes him at once
from cato's bald literalism and cicero's egotism. it was, however, in
impassioned attack that gracchus rose to his highest tones. the terms
_gracchi impetum_, [29] _tumultuator gracchus_, [30] among the latin
critics, and similar ones from plutarch and dio among the greeks, attest
the main character of his eloquence. his very outward form paralleled the
restlessness of his soul. he moved up and down, bared his arm, stamped
violently, made fierce gestures of defiance, and acted through real
emotion as the trained rhetoricians of a later age strove to act by rules
of art. his accusation of piso is said to have contained more maledictions
than charges; and we can believe that a temperament so fervid, when once
it gave the reins to passion, lost all self-command. it is possible we
might think less highly of gracchus's eloquence than did the ancients, if
his speeches remained. their lack of finish and repose may have been
unnoticed by critics who could hurl themselves in thought not merely into
the feeling but the very place which he occupied; but to moderns, whose
sympathy with a state of things so opposite must needs be imperfect, it is
possible that their power might not have compensated for the absence of
relief. important fragments from the speech _apud censores_ (124 b.c.),
from that _de legibus a se promulgatis_ (123 b.c.), and from that _de
mithridate_ (123 b.c.), are given and commented on by wordsworth.

among the friends and opponents of the gracchi were many orators whose
names are given by cicero with the minute care of a sympathising
historian; but as few, if any, remains of their speeches exist, it can
serve no purpose to recount the list. three celebrated names may be
mentioned as filling up the interval between c. gracchus and m. antonius.
the first of these is aemilius scaurus (163-90? b.c.), the haughty chief
of the senate, the unscrupulous leader of the oligarchical party. his
oratory is described by cicero [31] as conspicuous for dignity and a
natural but irresistible air of command; so that when he spoke for a
defendant, he seemed like one who gave his testimony rather than one who
pleaded. this want of flexibility unfitted him for success at the bar;
accordingly, we do not find that he was much esteemed as a patron; but for
summing up the debates at the senate, or delivering an opinion on a great
public question, none could be more impressive. speeches of his were
extant in cicero's time; also an autobiography, which, like caesar's
_commentaries_, was intended to put his conduct in the most favourable
light; these, however, were little read. scaurus lived to posterity, not
in his writings, but in his example of stern constancy to a cause. [32]

a man in many ways resembling him but of purer conduct, was rutilius (158-
78 b.c.), who is said by cicero to have been a splendid example of many-
sided culture. he was a scholar, a philosopher, a jurist of high repute, a
historian, and an orator, though the severity of the stoic sect, to which
he adhered, prevented his striving after oratorical excellence. his
impeachment for malversation in asia, and unjust condemnation to
banishment, reflect strongly on the formation of the roman law-courts. his
pride, however, was in part the cause of his exile. for had he chosen to
employ antonius or crassus to defend him, an acquittal would at least have
been possible; but conscious of rectitude, he refused any patron, and
relied on his own dry and jejune oratory, and such assistance as his young
friend cotta could give. sulla recalled him from smyrna, whither he had
repaired after his condemnation; but rutilius refused to return to the
city which had unjustly expelled him.

among the other aristocratic leaders, catulus, the "noble colleague" of
marius [33] (cons. 102), must be mentioned. he was not a stoic, and
therefore was free to chose a more ornamental method of speaking than
rutilius. cicero, with the partiality of a senatorial advocate, gives him
very high praise. "he was educated not in the old rough style, but in that
of our own day, or something more finished and elegant still. he had a
wide acquaintance with literature, the highest courtesy of life and
manners as well as of discourse, and a pure stream of genuine latin
eloquence. this is conspicuous in all his works, but most of all, in his
autobiography, written to the poet a. furius, in a style full of soft
grace recalling that of xenophon, but now, unhappily, little, if at all,
read. in pleading he was successful but not eminent. when heard alone, he
seemed excellent, but when contrasted with a greater rival, his faults at
once appeared." his chief virtue seems to have been the purity of his
latin idiom. he neither copied greek constructions nor affected archaisms,
as rutilius scaurus, cotta, and so many others in his own time, and
sallust, lucretius, and varro in a later age. [34] the absence of any
recognised standard of classical diction made it more difficult than at
first appears for an orator to fix on the right medium between affectation
and colloquialism.

the era inaugurated by the gracchi was in the highest degree favourable to
eloquence. the disordered state of the republic, in which party-spirit had
banished patriotism and was itself surrendering to armed violence, called
for a style of speaking commensurate with the turbulence of public life.
never in the world's history has fierce passion found such exponents in so
great a sphere. it is not only the vehemence of their language--that may
have been paralleled elsewhere--it is the _reality_ of it that impresses
us. the words that denounced an enemy were not idly flung into the forum;
they fell among those who had the power and the will to act upon them. he
who sent them forth must expect them to ruin either his antagonist or
himself. each man chose his side, with the daggers of the other party
before his face. his eloquence, like his sword, was a weapon for life and
death. only in the french revolution have oratory and assassination thus
gone hand in hand. demosthenes could lash the athenians into enthusiasm so
great that in delight at his eloquence they forgot his advice. "i want
you," he said, "not to applaud me, but to march against philip." [35]
there was no danger of the roman people forgetting action in applause.
they rejoiced to hear the orator, but it was that he might impel them to
tumultuous activity; he was caterer not for the satisfaction of their
ears, but for the employment of their hands. thus he paid a heavy price
for eminence. few of rome's greatest orators died in their beds. carbo put
an end to his own life; the two gracchi, antonius, drusus, cicero himself,
perished by the assassin's hand; crassus was delivered by sudden illness
from the same fate. it is not wonderful if with the sword hanging over
their heads, roman orators attain to a vehemence beyond example in other
nations. the charm that danger lends to daring is nowhere better shown
than in the case of cicero. timid by nature, he not only in his speeches
hazarded his life, but even when the dagger of antony was waiting for him,
he could not bring himself to flee. with the civil war, however, eloquence
was for a time suppressed. neither argument nor menace could make head
against the furious brutality of marius, or the colder butcheries of
sulla. but the intervening period produced two of the greatest speakers
rome ever saw, both of whom cicero places at the very summit of their art,
between whom he professes himself unable to decide, and about whom he
gives the most authentic and copious account. these were the advocates m.
antonius (143-87 b.c.) and m. licinius crassus (140-91 b.c.).

both of them spoke in the senate and assembly as well as in the courts;
and crassus was perhaps a better political than forensic orator.
nevertheless the criticism of cicero, from which we gain our chief
knowledge, is mainly directed to their forensic qualifications; and it is
probable that at the period at which they flourished, the law-courts
offered the fullest combination of advantages for bringing out all the
merits of a speaker. for the comitia were moved solely by passion or
interest; the senate was swayed by party considerations, and was little
touched by argument; whereas the courts offered just enough necessity for
exact reasoning without at all resisting appeals to popular passion. of
the two kinds of _judicia_ at rome, the civil cases were little sought
after; the public criminal trials being those which the great _patroni_
delighted to undertake. a few words may not be out of place here on the
general division of cases, and the jurisdiction of the magistrates,
senate, and people, as it is necessary to understand these in order to
appreciate the special kind of oratory they developed.

there had been, previously to this period, two praetors in rome, the
_praetor urbanus_, who adjudged cases between citizens in accordance with
civil law, and the _praetor peregrinus_, who presided whenever a foreigner
or alien was concerned, and judged according to the principles of natural
law. afterwards six praetors were appointed; and in the time of antonius
they judged not only civil but criminal cases, except those concerning the
life of a citizen or the welfare of the state, which the people reserved
for themselves. it must be remembered that the supreme judicial power was
vested in the sovereign people in their comitia; that they delegated it in
public matters to the senate, and in general legal cases to the praetor's
court, but that in every capital charge a final appeal to them remained.
the praetors at an early date handed over their authority to other judges,
chosen either from the citizens at large, or from the body of _judices
selecti_, who were renewed every year. these subsidiary judges might
consist of a single _arbiter_, of small boards of three, seven, or ten,
&c., or of a larger body called the _centum viri_, chosen from the thirty-
five tribes, who sat all the year, the others being only appointed for the
special case. but over their decisions the praetor exercised a superior
supervision, and he could annul them on appeal. the authorities on which
the praetor based his practice were those of the twelve tables and the
custom-law; but he had besides this a kind of legislative prerogative of
his own. for on coming into office he had to issue an edict, called
_edictum perpetuum_, [36] specifying the principles he intended to guide
him in any new cases that might arise. if these were merely a continuation
of those of his predecessor, his edict was called _tralaticium_, or
"handed on." but more often they were of an independent character, the
result of his knowledge or his prejudices; and too often he departed
widely from them in the course of his year of office. it was not until
after the time of crassus and antonius that a law was passed enforcing
consistency in this respect (67 b.c.). thus it was inevitable that great
looseness should prevail in the application of legal principles, from the
great variety of supplementary codes (edicta), and the instability of
case-law. moreover, the praetor was seldom a veteran lawyer, but generally
a man of moderate experience and ambitious views, who used the praetorship
merely as a stepping-stone to the higher offices of state. hence it was by
no means certain that he would be able to appreciate a complicated
technical argument, and as a matter of fact the more popular advocates
rarely troubled themselves to advance one.

praetors also generally presided over capital trials, of which the proper
jurisdiction lay with the comitia. in sulla's time their number was
increased to ten, and each was chairman of the _quaestio_ which sat on one
of the ten chief crimes, extortion, peculation, bribery, treason, coining,
forgery, assassination or poisoning, and violence. [37] as assessors he
had the _quaesitor_ or chief juror, and a certain number of the _judices
selecti_ of whom some account has been already given. the prosecutor and
defendant had the right of objecting to any member of the list. if more
than one accuser offered, it was decided which should act at a preliminary
trial called _divinatio_. owing to the desire to win fame by accusations,
this occurrence was not unfrequent.

when the day of the trial arrived the prosecutor first spoke, explaining
the case and bringing in the evidence. this consisted of the testimony of
free citizens voluntarily given; of slaves, wrung from them by torture;
and of written documents. the best advocates, as for instance cicero in
his _milo_, were not disposed, any more than we should be, to attach much
weight to evidence obtained by the rack; but in estimating the other two
sources they differed from us. we should give the preference to written
documents; the romans esteemed more highly the declarations of citizens.
these offered a grander field for the display of ingenuity and
misrepresentation; it is, therefore, in handling these that the celebrated
advocates put forth all their skill. the examination of evidence over, the
prosecutor put forth his case in a long and elaborate speech; and the
accused was then allowed to defend himself. both were, as a rule, limited
in point of time, and sometimes to a period which to us would seem quite
inconsistent with justice to the case. instead of the strict probity and
perfect independence which we associate with the highest ministers of the
law, the roman judices were often canvassed, bribed, or intimidated. so
flagitious had the practice become, that cicero mentions a whole bench
having been induced by indulgences of the most abominable kind to acquit
clodius, though manifestly guilty. we know also that pompey and antony
resorted to the practice of packing the forum with hired troops and
assassins; and we learn from cicero that it was the usual plan for
provincial governors to extort enough not only to satisfy their own
rapacity, but to buy their impunity from the judges. [38]

under circumstances like these we cannot wonder if strict law was little
attended to, and the moral principles that underlay it still less. the
chief object was to inflame the prejudices or anger of the jurors; or,
still more, to excite their compassion, to serve one's party, or to
acquire favour with the leading citizen. for example, it was a rule that
men of the same political views should appear on the same side. cicero and
hortensius, though often opposed, still retained friendly feelings for
each other; but when cicero went over to the senatorial party, the last
bar to free intercourse with his rival was removed, since henceforward
they were always retained together.

with regard to moving the pity of the judges, many instances of its
success are related both in greece and rome. the best are those of galba
and piso, both notorious culprits, but both acquitted; the one for
bringing forward his young children, the other for prostrating himself in
a shower of rain to kiss the judges' feet and rising up with a countenance
bedaubed with mud! facts like these, and they are innumerable, compel us
to believe that the reverence for justice as a sacred thing, so inbred in
christian civilization, was foreign to the people of rome. it is a gloomy
spectacle to see a mighty nation deliberately giving the rein to passion
and excitement heedless of the miscarriage of justice. the celebrated law,
re-enacted by gracchus, "that no citizen should be condemned to death
without the consent of the people," banished justice from the sphere of
reason to that of emotion or caprice. as progress widens emotion
necessarily contracts its sphere; the pure light of reason raises her
beacon on high. when antonius, the most successful of advocates, declared
that his success was due not to legal knowledge, of which he was
destitute, but to his making the judges pleased, first with themselves and
then with himself, we may appreciate his honesty; but we gladly
acknowledge a state of things as past and gone in which he could wind up
an accusation [39] with these words, "if it ever was excusable for the
roman people to give the reins to their just excitement, as without doubt
it often has been, there has no case existed in which it was more
excusable than now."

cicero regards the advent of these two men, m. antonius and crassus, as
analogous to that of demosthenes and hyperides at athens. they first
raised latin eloquence to a height that rivalled that of greece. but
though their merits were so evenly balanced that it was impossible to
decide between them, their excellencies were by no means the same. it is
evident that cicero preferred crassus, for he assigns him the chief place
in his dialogue _de oratore_, and makes him the vehicle of his own views.
moreover, he was a man of much more varied knowledge than antonius. an
opinion prevailed in cicero's day that neither of them was familiar with
greek literature. this, however, was a mistake. both were well read in it.
but antonius desired to be thought ignorant of it; hence he never brought
it forward in his speeches. crassus did not disdain the reputation of a
proficient, but he wished to be regarded as despising it. these relics of
old roman narrowness, assumed whether from conviction or, more probably,
to please the people, are remarkable at an epoch so comparatively
cultured. they show, if proof were wanted, how completely the appearance
of cicero marks a new period in literature, for he is as anxious to
popularise his knowledge of greek letters as his predecessors had been to
hide theirs. the advantages of antony were chiefly native and personal;
those of crassus acquired and artificial. antony had a ready wit, an
impetuous flow of words, not always the best, but good enough for the
purpose, a presence of mind and fertility of invention that nothing could
quench, a noble person, a wonderful memory, and a sonorous voice the very
defects of which he turned to his advantage; he never refused a case; he
seized the bearings of each with facility, and espoused it with zeal; he
knew from long practice all the arts of persuasion, and was an adept in
the use of them; in a word, he was thoroughly and genuinely popular.

crassus was grave and dignified, excellent in interpretation, definition,
and equitable construction, so learned in law as to be called the best
lawyer among the orators; [40] and yet with all this grace and erudition,
he joined a sparkling humour which was always lively, never commonplace,
and whose brilliant sallies no misfortune could check. his first speech
was an accusation of the renegade democrat carbo; his last, which was also
his best, was an assertion of the privileges of his order against the
over-bearing insolence of the consul philippus. the consul, stung to fury
by the sarcasm of the speaker, bade his lictor seize his pledges as a
senator. this insult roused crassus to a supreme effort. his words are
preserved by cicero [41]--"an tu, quum omnem auctoritatem universi ordinis
pro pignore putaris, eamque in conspectu populi romani concideris, me his
existimas pignoribus posse terreri? non tibi illa sunt caedenda, si
crassum vis coercere; haec tibi est incidenda lingua; qua vel evulsa,
spiritu ipso libidinem tuam libertas mea refutabit." this noble retort,
spoken amid bodily pain and weakness, brought on a fever which within a
week brought him to the grave (91 b.c.), as cicero says, by no means
prematurely, for he was thus preserved from the horrors that followed.
antonius lived for some years longer. it was under the tyrannical rule of
marius and cinna that he met his end. having found, through the
indiscretion of a slave, that he was in hiding, they sent hired assassins
to murder him. the men entered the chamber where the great orator lay, and
prepared to do their bloody work, but he addressed them in terms of such
pathetic eloquence that they turned back, melted with pity, and declared
they could not kill antonius. their leader then came in, and, less
accessible to emotion than his men, cut off antonius' head and carried it
to marius. it was nailed to the rostra, "exposed," says cicero, "to the
gaze of those citizens whose interests he had so often defended."

after the death of these two great leaders, there appear two inferior men
who faintly reflect their special excellences. these are c. aurelius cotta
(consul 75 b.c.) an imitator of antonius, though without any of his fire,
and p. sulpicius rufus (fl. 121-88 b.c.) a bold and vigorous speaker, who
tried, without success, to reproduce the high-bred wit of crassus. he was,
according to cicero, [42] the most _tragic_ of orators. his personal gifts
were remarkable, his presence commanding, his voice rich and varied. his
fault was want of application. the ease with which he spoke made him
dislike the labour of preparation, and shun altogether that of written
composition. cotta was exactly the opposite of sulpicius. his weak health,
a rare thing among the romans of his day, compelled him to practise a soft
sedate method of speech, persuasive rather than commanding. in this he was
excellent, but that his popularity was due chiefly to want of competitors
is shown by the suddenness of his eclipse on the first appearance of
hortensius. the gentle courteous character of cotta is well brought out in
cicero's dialogue on oratory, where his remarks are contrasted with the
mature but distinct views of crassus and antonius, with the conservative
grace of catulus, and the masculine but less dignified elegance of caesar.

another speaker of this epoch is carro, son of the carbo already
mentioned, an adherent of the senatorial party, and opponent of the
celebrated livius drusus. on the death of drusus he delivered an oration
in the assembly, the concluding words of which are preserved by cicero, as
an instance of the effectiveness of the trochaic rhythm. they were
received with a storm of applause, as indeed their elevation justly
merits. [43] "_o marce druse, patrem appello; tu dicere solebas sacram
esse rempublicam; quicunque eam violavissent, ab omnibus esse ei poenas
persolatas. patris dictum sapiens temeritas filii comprobavit._" in this
grand sentence sounds the very voice of rome; the stern patriotism, the
reverence for the words of a father, the communion of the living with
their dead ancestors. we cannot wonder at the fondness with which cicero
lingers over these ancient orators; while fully acknowledging his own
superiority, how he draws out their beauties, each from its crude
environment; how he shows them to be deficient indeed in cultivation and
learning, but to ring true to the old tradition of the state, and for that
very reason to speak with a power, a persuasiveness, and a charm, which
all the rules of polished art could never hope to attain.

in the concluding passage of the _de oratore_ catulus says he wishes
hortensius (114-50 b.c.) could have taken part in the debate, as he gave
promise of excelling in all the qualifications that had been specified.
crassus replies--"he not only gives promise of being, but is already one
of the first of orators. i thought so when i heard him defend the cause of
the africans during the year of my consulship, and i thought so still more
strongly when, but a short while ago, he spoke on behalf of the king of
bithynia." this is supposed to have been said in 91 b.c., the year of
crassus's death, four years after the first appearance of hortensius. this
brilliant orator, who at the age of nineteen spoke before crassus and
scaevola and gained their unqualified approval, and who, after the death
of antonius, rose at once into the position of leader of the roman bar,
was as remarkable for his natural as for his acquired endowments. eight
years senior to cicero, "prince of the courts" [44] when cicero began
public life, for some time his rival and antagonist, but afterwards his
illustrious though admittedly inferior coadjutor, and towards the close of
both of their lives, his intimate and valued friend; hortensius is one of
the few men in whom success did not banish enjoyment, and displacement by
a rival did not turn to bitterness. without presenting the highest virtue,
his career of forty-four years is nevertheless a pleasant and instructive
one. it showed consistency, independence, and honour; he never changed
sides, he never flattered the great, he never acquired wealth unjustly. in
these points he may be contrasted with cicero. but on the other hand, he
was inactive, luxurious, and effeminate; not like cicero, fighting to the
last, but retiring from public life as soon as he saw the domination of
pompey or caesar to be inevitable; not even in his professional labours
showing a strong ambition, but yielding with epicurean indolence the palm
of superiority to his young rival; still less in his home life and leisure
moments pursuing like cicero his self-culture to develop his own nature
and enrich the minds and literature of his countrymen, but regaling
himself at luxurious banquets in sumptuous villas, decked with everything
that could delight the eye or charm the fancy; preserving herds of deer,
wild swine, game of all sorts for field and feast; stocking vast lakes
with rare and delicate fish, to which this brilliant epicure was so
attached that on the death of a favourite lamprey he shed tears; buying
the costliest of pictures, statues, and embossed works; and furnishing a
cellar which yielded to his unworthy heir 10,000 casks of choice chian
wine. when we read the pursuits in which hortensius spent his time, we
cannot wonder that he was soon overshadowed; the stuff of the roman was
lacking in him, and great as were his talents, even they, as cicero justly
remarks, were not calculated to insure a mature or lasting fame. they lay
in the lower sphere of genius rather than the higher; in a bright
expression, a deportment graceful to such a point that the greatest actors
studied from him as he spoke; in a voice clear, mellow, and persuasive; in
a memory so prodigious that once after being present at an auction and
challenged to repeat the list of sale, he recited the entire catalogue
without hesitation, like the sailor the points of his compass, backwards.
as a consequence he was never at a loss. everything suggested itself at
the right moment, giving him no anxiety that might spoil the ease of his
manner and his matchless confidence; and if to all this we add a
copiousness of expression and rich splendour of language exceeding all
that had ever been heard in rome, the encomiums so freely lavished on him
by cicero both in speeches and treatises, hardly seem exaggerated.

there are few things pleasanter in the history of literature than the
friendship of these two great men, untinctured, at least on hortensius's
part, by any drop of jealousy; and on cicero's, though now and then
overcast by unworthy suspicions, yet asserted afterwards with a warm
generosity and manly confession of his weakness which left nothing to be
desired. though there were but eight years between them, hortensius must
be held to belong to the older period, since cicero's advent constitutes
an era.

the chief events in the life of hortensius are as follows. he served two
campaigns in the social war (91 b.c.), but soon after gave up military
life, and took no part in the civil struggles that followed. his
ascendancy in the courts dates from 83 b.c. and continued till 70 b.c.
when cicero dethroned him by the prosecution of verres. hortensius was
consul the following year, and afterwards we find him appearing as
advocate on the senatorial side against the self-styled champions of the
people, whose cause at that time cicero espoused (_e.g._ in the gabinian
and manilian laws). when cicero, after his consulship (63 b.c.), went over
to the aristocratic party, he and hortensius appeared regularly on the
same side, hortensius conceding to him the privilege of speaking last,
thus confessing his own inferiority. the party character of great criminal
trials has already been alluded to, and is an important element in the
consideration of them. a master of eloquence speaking for a senatorial
defendant before a jury of equites, might hope, but hardly expect, an
acquittal; and a senatorial orator, pleading before jurymen of his own
order needed not to exercise the highest art in order to secure a
favourable hearing. it has been suggested [45] that his fame is in part
due to the circumstance, fortunate for him, that he had to address the
courts as reorganised by sulla. the coalition of pompey, caesar, and
crassus (60 b.c.), sometimes called the _first triumvirate_, showed
plainly that the state was near collapse; and hortensius, despairing of
its restitution, retired from public life, confining himself to the duties
of an advocate, and more and more addicting himself to refined pleasures.
the only blot on his character is his unscrupulousness in dealing with the
judges. cicero accuses him [46] of bribing them on one occasion, and the
fact that he was not contradicted, though his rival was present, makes the
accusation more than probable. the fame of hortensius waned not only
through cicero's superior lustre, but also because of his own lack of
sustained effort. the peculiar style of his oratory is from this point of
view so ably criticised by cicero that, having no remains of hortensius to
judge by, we translate some of his remarks. [47]

"if we inquire why hortensius obtained more celebrity in his youth than in
his mature age, we shall find there are two good reasons. first because
his style of oratory was the asiatic, which is more becoming to youth than
to age. of this style there are two divisions; the one sententious and
witty, the sentiments neatly turned and graceful rather than grave or
sedate: an example of this in history is timaeus; in oratory during my own
boyhood there was hierocles of alabanda, and still more his brother
menecles, both whose speeches are, considering their style, worthy of the
highest praise. the other division does not aim at a frequent use of pithy
sentiment, but at rapidity and rush of expression; this now prevails
throughout asia, and is characterised not only by a stream of eloquence
but by a graceful and ornate vocabulary: aeschylus of cnidos, and my own
contemporary aeschines the milesian, are examples of it. they possess a
fine flow of speech, but they lack precision and grace of sentiment. both
these classes of oratory suit young men well, but in older persons they
show a want of dignity. hence hortensius, who excelled in both, obtained
as a young man the most tumultuous applause. for he possessed that strong
leaning for polished and condensed maxims which menecles displayed; as
with whom, so with hortensius, some of these maxims were more remarkable
for sweetness and grace than for aptness and indispensable use; and so his
speech, though highly strung and impassioned without losing finish or
smoothness, was nevertheless not approved by the older critics. i have
seen philippus hide a smile, or at other times look angry or annoyed; but
the youths were lost in admiration, and the multitude was deeply moved. at
that time he was in popular estimation almost perfect, and held the first
place without dispute. for though his oratory lacked authority, it was
thought suitable to his age; but when his position as a consular and a
senator demanded a weightier style, he still adhered to the same; and
having given up his former unremitting study and practice, retained only
the neat concise sentiments, but lost the rich adornment with which in old
times he had been wont to clothe his thoughts."

the _asiatic_ style to which cicero here alludes, was affected, as its
name implies, by the rhetoricians of asia minor, and is generally
distinguished from the _attic_ by its greater profusion of verbal
ornament, its more liberal use of tropes, antithesis, figures, &c. and,
generally, by its inanity of thought. rhodes, which had been so well able
to appreciate the eloquence of aeschines and demosthenes, first opened a
crusade against this false taste, and cicero (who himself studied at
rhodes as well as athens) brought about a similar return to purer models
at rome. the asiatic style represents a permanent type of oratorical
effort, the desire to use word-painting instead of life-painting,
turgidity instead of vigour, allusiveness instead of directness, point
instead of wit, frigid inflation instead of real passion. it borrows
poetical effects, and heightens the colour without deepening the shade. in
greece aeschines shows some traces of an asiatic tendency as contrasted
with the soberer self-restraint of demosthenes. in rome hortensius, as
contrasted with cicero, and even cicero himself, according to some
critics, as contrasted with brutus and calvus,--though this charge is
hardly well-founded,--in france bossuet, in england burke, have leaned
towards the same fault.

we have now traced the history of roman oratory to the time of cicero, and
we have seen that it produces names of real eminence, not merely in the
history of rome, but in that of humanity. the loss to us of the speeches
of such orators as cato, gracchus, antonius, and crassus is incalculable;
did we possess them we should be able form a truer estimate of roman
genius than if we possessed the entire works of ennius, pacuvius, or
attius. for the great men who wielded this tremendous weapon were all
burgesses of rome, they had all the good and all the bad qualities which
that name suggests, many of them in an extraordinary degree. they are all
the precursors, models, or rivals of cicero, the greatest of roman
orators; and in them the true structure of the language as well as the
mind of rome would have been fully, though unconsciously, revealed. if the
literature of a country be taken as the expression in the field of thought
of the national character as pourtrayed in action, this group of orators
would be considered the most genuine representative of roman literature.
the permanent contributions to human thought would indeed have been few:
neither in eloquence nor in any other domain did rome prove herself
creative, but in eloquence she at least showed herself beyond expression
masculine and vigorous. the supreme interest of her history, the massive
characters of the men that wrought it, would here have shown themselves in
the working; men whose natures are a riddle to us, would have stood out,
judged by their own testimony, clear as statues; and we should not have
had so often to pin our faith on the biassed views of party, or the
uncritical panegyrics of school-bred professors or courtly rhetoricians.
the next period shows us the culmination, the short bloom, and the sudden
fall of national eloquence, when with the death of cicero the "latin
tongue was silent," [48] and as he himself says, _clamatores_ not
_oratores_ were left to succeed him.




chapter xi.

other kinds of prose literature, grammar, rhetoric, and philosophy
(147-63 b.c.).


great literary activity of all kinds was, after the third punic war,
liable to continual interruption from political struggles or revolutions.
but between each two periods of disturbance there was generally an
interval in which philosophy, law, and rhetoric were carefully studied.
as, however, no work of this period has come down to us except the
treatise to herennius, our notice of it will be proportionately general
and brief. we shall touch on the principal studies in order. first in time
as in importance comes law, the earliest great representative of which is
p. mucius scaevola, consul in 133 b.c. but better known as pontifex
maximus. in this latter office, which he held for several years, mucius
did good service to literature. he united a high technical training with a
liberal mind, and superintended the publication of the _annales
pontificum_ from the earliest period to his own date. this was a great
boon to historians. he gave another to jurists. his _responsa_ were
celebrated for their insight into the principles of law, and for the
minute knowledge they displayed. he was conscientious enough to study the
law of every case before he undertook to plead it, a practice which,
however commendable, was rare even with advocates of the highest fame, as,
for example, m. antonius.

the jurisconsult of this period used to offer his services without payment
to any who chose to consult him. at first he appeared in the forum, but as
his fame and the number of applicants increased, he remained at home and
received all day. his replies were always oral, but when written down were
considered as authoritative, and often quoted by the orators. in return
for this laborious occupation, he expected the support of his clients in
his candidature for the offices of state. an anecdote is preserved of c.
figulus, a jurisconsult, who, not having been successful for the
consulship, addressed his _consultores_ thus, "you know how to _consult_
me, but not (it seems) how to make me _consul_." [1] in addition to the
parties in a suit, advocates in other causes often came to a great
jurisconsult to be _coached_ in the law of their case. for instance,
antonius, who, though a ready speaker, had no knowledge of jurisprudence,
often went to scaevola for this purpose. moreover there were always one or
two regular pupils who accompanied the jurisconsult, attended carefully to
his words, and committed them assiduously to memory or writing. cicero
himself did this for the younger scaevola, and thus laid the foundation of
that clear grasp on the civil law which was so great a help to him in his
more difficult speeches. it was not necessary that the pupil should
himself intend to become a _consultus_; it was enough that he desired to
acquire the knowledge for public purposes, although, of course, it
required great interest to procure for a young man so high a privilege.
cicero was introduced to scaevola by the orator crassus. the family of the
mucii, as noticed by cicero, were traditionally distinguished by their
legal knowledge, as that of the appii claudii were by eloquence. the augur
q. mucius scaevola who comes midway between publius and his son quintus
was somewhat less celebrated than either, but he was nevertheless a man of
eminence. he died probably in 87 b.c., and cicero mentions that it was in
consequence of this event that he himself became a pupil of his nephew.
[2]

the great importance of religious law must not be forgotten in estimating
the acquirements of these men. though to us the _jus augurale_ and _jus
pontificium_ are of small interest compared with the _jus civile_; yet to
the romans of 120 b.c., and especially to an old and strictly aristocratic
family, they had all the attraction of exclusiveness and immemorial
authority. in all countries religious law exercises at first a sway far in
excess of its proper province, and rome was no exception to the rule. the
publication of civil law is an era in civilization. just as the
chancellorship and primacy of england were often in the hands of one
person and that an ecclesiastic, so in rome the pontifices had at first
the making of almost all law. what a canonist was to mediaeval europe, a
pontifex was to senatorial rome. in the time of which we are now speaking
(133-63 b.c.), the secular law had fully asserted its supremacy on its own
ground, and it was the dignity and influence, not the power of the post,
that made the pontificate so great an object of ambition, and so
inaccessible to upstart candidates. even for cicero to obtain a seat in
the college of augurs was no easy task, although he had already won his
way to the consulship and been hailed as the saviour of his country.

the younger scaevola (q. mucius scaevola), who had been his father's
pupil, [3] and was the most eloquent of the three, was born about 135
b.c., was consul 95 with licinius crassus for his colleague, and
afterwards pontifex maximus. he was an accomplished greek scholar, a man
of commanding eloquence, deeply versed in the stoic philosophy, and of the
highest nobility of character. as long well says, "he is one of those
illustrious men whose fame is not preserved by his writings, but in the
more enduring monument of the memory of all nations to whom the language
of rome is known." his chief work, which was long extant, and is highly
praised by cicero, was a digest of the civil law. rudorff says of it, [4]
"for the first time we meet here with a comprehensive, uniform, and
methodical system, in the place of the old interpretation of laws and
casuistry, of legal opinions and prejudices." immediately on its
publication it acquired great authority, and was commented upon within a
few years of the death of its author. it is quoted in the digest, and is
the earliest work to which reference is there made. [5] he was especially
clear in definitions and distinctions, [6] and the grace with which he
invested a dry subject made him deservedly popular. though so profound a
lawyer, he was quite free from the offensive stamp of the mere
professional man. his urbanity, unstained integrity, and high position,
fitted him to exercise a widespread influence. he had among his hearers
cicero, as we have already seen, and among jurists proper, aquillius
gallus, balbus lucilius, and others, who all attained to eminence. his
virtue was such that his name became proverbial for probity as for legal
eminence. in horace he is coupled with gracchus as the ideal of a lawyer,
as the other of an orator.

  "gracchus ut hic illi foret, huic ut mucius ille." [7]

the great oratorical activity of this age produced a corresponding
interest in the theory of eloquence. we have seen that many of the orators
received lessons from greek rhetoricians. we have seen also the deep
attraction which rhetoric possessed over the roman mind. it was, so to
speak, the form of thought in which their intellectual creations were
almost all cast. such a maxim as that attributed to scaevola, _fiat
iustitia: ruat caelum_, is not legal but rhetorical. the plays of attius
owed much of their success to the ability with which statement was pitted
against counter-statement, plea against plea. the philosophic works of
cicero are coloured with rhetoric. cases are advanced, refuted, or summed
up, with a view to presentability (_veri simile_), not abstract truth. the
history of livy, the epic of virgil, are eminently rhetorical. a roman
when not fighting was pleading. it was, then, important that he should he
well grounded in the art. greek rhetoricians, in spite of cato's
opposition, had been steadily making way, and increasing the number of
their pupils; but it was not until about 93 b.c. that plotius gallus
taught the principles of rhetoric in latin. quintilian says, [8] "_latinos
dicendi praeceptores extremis l. crassi temporibus coepisse cicero auctor
est: quorum insignis maxime plotius fuit._" he was the first of that long
list of writers who expended wit, learning, and industry, in giving
precepts of a mechanical character to produce what is unproduceable,
namely, a successful style of speaking. their treatises are interesting,
for they show on the one hand the severe technical application which the
romans were always willing to bestow in order to imitate the greeks; and
on the other, the complex demands of latin rhetoric as contrasted with the
simpler and more natural style of modern times.

the most important work on the subject is the treatise dedicated to
herennius (80 b.c.), written probably in the time of sulla, and for a long
time reckoned among cicero's works. the reason for this confusion is
twofold. first, the anonymous character of the work; and, secondly, the
frequent imitations of it by cicero in his _de inventione_, an incomplete
essay written when he was a young man. who the author was is not agreed;
the balance of probability is in favour of cornificius. kayser [9] points
out several coincidences between cornificius's views, as quoted by
quintilian, and the rhetorical treatise to herennius. the author, whoever
he may be, was an accomplished man, and, while a warm admirer of greek
eloquence, by no means disposed to concede the inferiority of his own
countrymen. his criticism upon the _inanitas_ [10] of the greek manuals is
thoroughly just. they were simply guides to an elegant accomplishment, and
had no bearing on real life. it was quite different with the roman
manuals. these were intended to fit the reader for forensic contests, and,
we cannot doubt, did materially help towards this result. it was only in
the imperial epoch that empty ingenuity took the place of activity, and
rhetoric sunk to the level of that of greece. there is nothing calling for
special remark in the contents of the book, though all is good. the chief
points of interest in this subject will be discussed in a later chapter.
the style is pure and copious, the latin that finished idiom which is the
finest vehicle for roman thought, that spoken by the highest circles at
the best period of the language.

the science of grammar was now exciting much attention. the stoic writers
had formulated its main principles, and had assigned it a place in their
system of general philosophy. it remained for the roman students to apply
the greek treatment to their own language. apparently, the earliest
labours were of a desultory kind. the poet lucilius treated many points of
orthography, pronunciation, and the like; and he criticised inaccuracies
of syntax or metre in the poets who had gone before him. a little later we
find the same mine further worked. quintilian observes that grammar began
at rome by the exegesis of classical authors. octavius lampadio led the
van with a critical commentary on the _punica_ of naevius, and q.
vargunteius soon after performed the same office for the annals of ennius.
the first scientific grammarian, was aelius stilo, a roman knight (144-70
b.c.). his name was l. aelius praeconinus; he received the additional
cognomen _stilo_ from the facility with which he used his pen, especially
in writing speeches for others to deliver. at the same time he was no
orator, and cicero implies that better men often used his compositions
through mere laziness, and allowed them to pass as their own. [11] cicero
mentions in more than one place that he himself had been an admiring pupil
of aelius. and lucilius addressed some of his satires to him, probably
those on grammar,

  "has res ad te scriptas luci misimus aeli;"

so that he is a bond of connection between the two epochs. his learning
was profound and varied. he dedicated his investigations to varro, who
speaks warmly of him, but mentions that his etymologies are often
incorrect. he appears to have bestowed special care on plautus, in which
department he was followed by varro, some of the results of whose
criticism have been already given.

the impulse given by stilo was rapidly extended. grammar became a
favourite study with the romans, as indeed it was one for which they were
eminently fitted. the perfection to which they carried the analysis of
sentences and the practical rules for correct speech as well as the
systematization of the accidence, has made their grammars a model for all
modern school-works. it is only recently that a deeper scientific
knowledge has reorganised the entire treatment, and substituted for
superficial analogy the true basis of a common structure, not only between
greek and latin, but among all the languages of the indo-european class.
nevertheless, the roman grammarians deserve great praise for their
elaborate results in the sphere of correct writing. no defects of syntax
perplex the reader of the classical authors. imperfect and unpliable the
language is, but never inexact. and though the meaning is often hard to
settle, this is owing rather to the inadequacy of the material than the
carelessness of the writer.

side by side with rhetoric and grammar, philosophy made its appearance at
rome. there was no importation from greece to which a more determined
resistance was made from the first by the national party. in the
consulship of strabo and messala (162 b.c.) a decree was passed banishing
philosophers and rhetoricians from rome. seven years later took place the
embassy of the three leaders of the most celebrated schools of thought,
diogenes the stoic, critolaus the peripatetic, and carneades the new
academician. the subtilty and eloquence of these disputants rekindled the
interest in philosophy which had been smothered, not quenched, by the
vigorous measures of the senate. there were two reasons why an interest in
these studies was dreaded. first, they tended to spread disbelief in the
state religion, by which the ascendency of the oligarchy was in great
measure maintained; secondly, they distracted men's minds, and diverted
them from that exclusive devotion to public life which the old _regime_
demanded. nevertheless, some of the greatest nobles ardently espoused the
cause of free thought. after the war with perseus, and the detention of
the achaean hostages in rome, many learned greeks well versed in
philosophical inquiries were brought into contact with their conquerors in
a manner well calculated to promote mutual confidence. the most eminent of
these was polybius, who lived for years on terms of intimacy with scipio
and laelius, and imparted to them his own wide views and varied knowledge.
from them may be dated the real study of philosophy at rome. they both
attained the highest renown in their lifetime and after their death for
their philosophical eminence, [12] but apparently they left no
philosophical writings. the spirit, however, in which they approached
philosophy is eminently characteristic of their nation, and determined the
lines in which philosophic activity afterwards moved.

in no department of thought is the difference between the greek and roman
mind more clearly seen; in none was the form more completely borrowed, and
the spirit more completely missed. the object of greek philosophy had been
the attainment of absolute truth. the long line of thinkers from thales to
aristotle had approached philosophy in the belief that they could by it be
enabled to understand the cause of all that is. this lofty anticipation
pervades all their theories, and by its fruitful influence engenders that
wondrous grasp and fertility of thought [13] which gives their
speculations an undying value. it is true that in the later systems this
consciousness is less strongly present. it struggles to maintain itself in
stoicism and epicureanism against the rising claims of human happiness to
be considered as the goal of philosophy. in the new academy (which in the
third century before christ was converted to scepticism) and in the
sceptical school, we see the first confession of incapacity to discover
truth. instead of certainties they offer probabilities sufficient to guide
us through life; the only axiom which they assert as incontrovertible
being the fact that we know nothing. thus instead of proposing as the
highest activity of man a life of speculative thought, they came to
consider inactivity and impassibility [13] the chief attainable good.
their method of proof was a dialectic which strove to show the
inconsistency or uncertainty of their opponent's positions, but which did
not and could not arrive at any constructive result. philosophy (to use an
ancient phrase) had fallen from the sphere of _knowledge_ to that of
_opinion_. [15]

of these _opinions_ there were three which from their definiteness were
well calculated to lay hold on the roman mind. the first was that of the
stoics, that virtue is the only good; the second that of the epicureans,
that pleasure is the end of man; the third that of the academy, that
nothing can be known. [16] these were by no means the only, far less the
exclusive characteristics of each school; for in many ways they all
strongly resembled each other, particularly stoicism and the new academy;
and in their definition of what should be the practical result of their
principles all were substantially agreed. [17]

but what to the greeks was a speculative principle to be drawn out by
argument to its logical conclusions, to the romans was a practical maxim
to be realized in life. the romans did not understand the love of abstract
truth, or the charm of abstract reasoning employed for its own sake
without any ulterior end. to profess the doctrines of stoicism, and live a
life of self-indulgence, was to be false to one's convictions; to embrace
epicurus's system without making it subservient to enjoyment, was equally
foreign to a consistent character. in athens the daily life of an
epicurean and a stoic would not present any marked difference; in
discussion they would be widely divergent, but the contrast ended there.
in rome, on the contrary, it was the mode of life which made the chief
distinction. men who laboured for the state as jurists or senators, who
were grave and studious, generally, if not always, adopted the tenets of
zeno; if they were orators, they naturally turned rather to the academy,
which offered that balancing of opinions so congenial to the tone of mind
of an advocate. among public men of the highest character, very few
espoused epicurus's doctrines.

the mere assertion that pleasure was the _summum bonum_ for man was so
repugnant to the old roman views that it could hardly have been made the
basis of a self-sacrificing political activity. accordingly we find in the
period before cicero only men of the second rank representing epicurean
views. amafinius is stated to have been the first who popularised them.
[18] he wrote some years before cicero, and from his lucid and simple
treatment immediately obtained a wide circulation for his books. the
multitude (says cicero), hurried to adopt his precepts, [19] finding them
easy to understand, and in harmony with their own inclinations. the second
writer of mark seems to have been rabirius. he also wrote on the physical
theory of epicurus in a superficial way. he neither divided his subject
methodically, nor attempted exact definitions, and all his arguments were
drawn from the world of visible things. in fact, his system seems to have
been a crude and ordinary materialism, such as the vulgar are in all ages
prone to, and beyond which their minds cannot go. the refined catulus was
also an adherent of epicureanism, though he also attached himself to the
academy. among greeks resident at rome the best known teachers were
phaedrus and zeno; a book by the former on the gods was largely used by
cicero in the first book of his _de natura deorum_. a little later
philodemus of gadara, parts of whose writings are still extant, seems to
have risen to the first place. in the time of cicero this system obtained
more disciples among the foremost men. both statesmen and poets cultivated
it, and gained it a legitimate place among the genuine philosophical
creeds. [20]

stoicism was far more congenial to the national character, and many great
men professed it. besides laelius, who was a disciple of diodes and
panactius, we have the names of rutilius rufus, aelius stilo, balbus, and
scaevola. but during the tumultuous activity of these years it was not
possible for men to cultivate philosophy with deep appreciation. political
struggles occupied their minds, and it was in their moments of relaxation
only that the questions agitated by stoicism would he discussed. we must
remember that as yet stoicism was one of several competing systems.
peripateticism and the academy, as has been said, attracted the more
sceptical or argumentative minds, for their dialectics were far superior
to those of stoicism; it was in its moral grandeur that stoicism towered
not only above these but above all other systems that have been invented,
and the time for the full recognition of this moral grandeur had not yet
come. at present men were occupied in discussing its logical quibbles and
paradoxes, and in balancing its claims to cogency against those of its
rivals. it was not until the significance of its central doctrine was
tried to the uttermost by the dark tyranny of the empire, that stoicism
stood erect and alone as the sole representative of all that was good and
great. still, the fact that its chief professors were men of weight in the
state, lent it a certain authority, and cicero, among the few definite
doctrines that he accepts, numbers that of stoicism that virtue is
sufficient for happiness.

we shall close this chapter with one or two remarks on the relation of
philosophy to the state religion. it must be observed that the formal and
unpliable nature of the roman cult made it quite unable to meet the
requirements of advancing enlightenment. it was a superstition, not a
religion; it admitted neither of allegoric interpretation nor of poetical
idealisation. hence there was no alternative but to believe or disbelieve
it. there can be no doubt that all educated romans did the latter. the
whole machinery of ritual and ceremonies was used for purely political
ends; it was no great step to regard it as having a purely political
basis. to men with so slight a hold as this on the popular creed, the
religion and philosophy of greece were suddenly revealed. it was a
spiritual no less than an intellectual revolution. their views on the
question of the unseen were profoundly changed. the simple but manly piety
of the family religion, the regular ceremonial of the state, were
confronted with the splendid hierarchy of the greek pantheon and the
subtle questionings of greek intellect. it is no wonder that roman
conviction was, so to speak, taken by storm. the popular faith received a
shock from which it never rallied. augustus and others restored the
ancient ritual, but no edict could restore the lost belief. so deep had
the poison penetrated that no sound place was left. with superstition they
cast off all religion. for poetical or imaginative purposes the greek
deities under their latin dress might suffice, but for a guide of life
they were utterly powerless. the nobler minds therefore naturally turned
to philosophy, and here they found, if not certainty, at least a
reasonable explanation of the problems they encountered. is the world
governed by law? if so, is that law a moral one? if not, is the ruler
chance? what is the origin of the gods? of man? of the soul? questions
like these could neither be resolved by the roman nor by the helleno-roman
systems of religion, but they were met and in a way answered by greek
philosophy. hence it became usual for every thinking roman to attach
himself to the tenets of some sect, which ever best suited his own
comprehension or prejudices. but this adhesion did not involve a rigid or
exclusive devotion. many were eclectics, that is, adopted from various
systems such elements as seemed to them most reasonable. for instance,
cicero was a stoic more than anything else in his ethical theory, a new
academician in his logic, and in other respects a platonist. but even he
varied greatly at different times. there was, however, no combination
among professors of the same sect with a view to practical work or
dissemination of doctrines. had such been attempted, it would at once have
been put down by the state. but it never was. philosophical beliefs of
whatever kind did not in the least interfere with conformity to the state
religion. one scaevola was pontifex maximus, another was augur; cicero
himself was augur, so was caesar. the two things were kept quite distinct.
philosophy did not influence political action in any way. it was simply a
refuge for the mind, such as all thinking men must have, and which if not
supplied by a true creed, will inevitably be sought in a false or
imperfect one. and the noble doctrines professed by the great greek
schools were certainly far more worthy of the adhesion of such men as
scaevola and laelius, than the worn-out cult which the popular ceremonial
embodied.




book ii.

the golden age.

from the consulship of cicero to the death of augustus (63 b.c.-14 a.d.).


part i.

the republican period.


chapter i.

varro.


the period embraced by the present book contains the culmination of all
kinds of literature, the drama alone excepted. it falls naturally into two
divisions, each marked by special and clearly-defined characteristics. the
first begins with the recognition of cicero as the chief man of letters at
rome, and ends with the battle of philippi, a year after his death. it
extends over a period of two and twenty years (about 63-42 b.c.), though
many of cicero's orations are anterior, and some of varro's works
posterior, to the extreme dates. in this period latin prose writing
attained its perfection. the storms which shook and finally overthrew the
republic turned the attention of all minds to political questions. oratory
and history were the prevailing forms of intellectual activity. it was not
until the close of the period that philosophy was treated by cicero during
his compulsory absence from public life; and poetry rose once more into
prominence in the works of lucretius and catullus. the chief
characteristics of the literature of this period are freedom and vigour.
in every author the bold spirit of the republic breathes forth; and in the
greatest is happily combined with an extensive and elegant scholarship,
equally removed from pedantry and dullness.

the second division (42 b.c.-14 a.d.) begins shortly after the battle of
philippi, with the earliest poems of varius and virgil, and closes with
the death of augustus. it is pre-eminently an era of poets, livy alone
being a prose writer of the first rank, and is marked by all the
characteristics of an imperial age. the transition from the last poems of
catullus to the first of virgil is complete. nevertheless, many republican
authors lived on into this period, as varro, pollio, and bibaculus. but
their character and genius belong to the republic, and, with the exception
of pollio, they will be noticed under the republican writers. the entire
period represents the full maturity and perfection of the latin language,
and the epithet _classical_ is by many restricted to the authors who wrote
in it. it is best, however, not to narrow unnecessarily the sphere of
classicality; to exclude terence on the one hand or tacitus and pliny on
the other, would savour of artificial restriction rather than that of a
natural classification.

the first writer that comes before us is m. terentius varro, 116-28 b.c.
he is at once the earliest and the latest of the series. his birth took
place ten years before that of cicero, and his death fifteen years after
cicero's murder, in the third year of the reign of augustus. his long life
was devoted almost entirely to study, and he became known even in his
lifetime as the most learned of the romans. this did not, however, prevent
him from offering his services to the state when the state required them.
he served more than once under pompey, acquitting himself with
distinction, so that in the civil war the important post of legatus was
intrusted to him in company with petreius and afranius in spain. but varro
felt from the first his inability to cope with his adversary. caesar
speaks of him as acting coolly in pompey's interest until the successes of
afranius at ilerda roused him to more vigorous measures; but the triumph
of the pompeians was shortlived; and when caesar convened the delegates at
corduba, varro found himself shut out from all the fortified towns, and in
danger of being deserted by his army. [1] he therefore surrendered at
discretion, returned to italy, and took no more part in public affairs. we
hear of him occasionally in cicero's letters as studying in his country
seats at tusculum, cumae, or casinum, indifferent to politics, and
preparing those great works of antiquarian research which have
immortalised his name. caesar's victorious return brought him out of his
retreat. he was placed over the library which caesar built for public use,
an appointment equally complimentary to varro and honourable to caesar.
antony, however, incapable of the generosity of his chief, placed varro's
name on the list of the proscribed, at a time when the old man was over
seventy years of age, and had long ceased to have any weight in politics.
nothing more clearly shows the abominable motives that swayed the
triumvirs than this attempt to murder an aged and peaceful citizen for the
sake of possessing his wealth. for varro had the good or bad fortune to be
extremely rich. his casine villa, alluded to by cicero, and partly
described by himself, was sumptuously decorated, and his other estates
were large and productive. the casine villa was made the scene of antony's
revelry; he and his fellow-rioters plundered the rooms, emptied the
cellar, burned the library, and carried on every kind of debauchery and
excess. few passages in all eloquence are more telling than that in which
cicero with terrible power contrasts the conduct of the two successive
occupants. [2] varro, through the zeal of his friends, managed to escape
antony's fury, and for a time lay concealed in the villa of galenas, at
which antony was a frequent visitor, little suspecting that his enemy was
within his grasp. an edict was soon issued, however, exempting the old man
from the effect of the proscription, so that he was enabled to live in
peace at rome until his death. but deprived of his wealth (which augustus
afterwards restored), deprived of his friends, and above all, deprived of
his library, he must have felt a deep shadow cast over his declining
years. nevertheless, he remained cheerful, and to all appearance
contented, and charmed those who knew him by the vigour of his
conversation and his varied antiquarian lore. he is never mentioned by any
of the augustan writers.

varro belongs to the genuine type of old roman, improved but not altered
by greek learning, with his heart fixed in the past, deeply conservative
of everything national, and even in his style of speech protesting against
the innovations of the day. if we reflect that when varro wrote his
treatise on husbandry, virgil was at work on the _georgics_, and then
compare the diction of the two, it seems almost incredible that they
should have been contemporaries. in all literature there is probably no
such instance of rock-like impenetrability to fashion; for him alexandria
might never have existed. he recalls the age of cato rather than that of
cicero. his versatility was as great as his industry. there was scarcely
any department of prose or poetry, provided it was national, in which he
did not excel. his early life well fitted him for severe application. born
at reate, in the sabine territory, which was the nurse of all manly
virtues, [3] varro, as he himself tells us, had to rough it as a boy; he
went barefoot over the mountain side, rode without saddle or bridle, and
wore but a single tunic. [4] bold, frank, and sarcastic, he had all the
qualities of the old-fashioned country gentleman. at rome he became
intimate with aelius stilo, whose opinion of his pupil is shown by the
inscription of his grammatical treatise to him. stilo's mantle descended
on varro, but with sevenfold virtue. not only grammar, by which term we
must understand philology and etymology as well as syntax, but antiquities
secular and religious, and almost all the liberal arts, were passed under
review by his encyclopaedic mind.

at the same time lighter themes had strong attraction for him. he
possessed in a high degree that racy and caustic wit which was a special
italian product, and had been conspicuous in cato and lucilius. but while
cato studied to be oracular, and lucilius to be critical, varro seems to
have indulged his vein without any special object. though by no means a
born poet, he had the faculty of writing terse and elegant verse when he
chose, and in his younger days composed a long list of metrical works.
there were among them _pseudotragoediae_, which teuffel thinks were the
same as the _hilarotragoediae_, or _rhinthonicae_, so called from their
inventor rhinthon; though others class them with the _komodotragodiai_, of
which plautus's _amphitruo_ is the best known instance. however this may
be, they were mock-heroic compositions in which the subjects consecrated
by tragic usage were travestied or burlesqued. it is probable that they
were mere literary exercises designed to beguile leisure or to facilitate
the labour of composition, like the closet tragedies composed by cicero
and his brother quintus; and varro certainly owed none of his fame to
them. other poems of his are referred to by cicero, and perhaps by
quintilian; [5] but in the absence of definite allusions we can hardly
characterize them. there was one class of semi-poetical composition which
varro made peculiarly his own, the _satura menippea_, a medley of prose
and verse, treating of all kinds of subjects just as they came to hand in
the plebeian style, often with much grossness, but with sparkling point.
of these _saturae_ he wrote no less than 150 books, of which fragments
have been preserved amounting to near 600 lines. menippus of gadara, the
originator of this style of composition, lived about 280 b.c.; he
interspersed jocular and commonplace topics with moral maxims and
philosophical doctrines, and may have added contemporary pictures, though
this is uncertain.

varro followed him; we find him in the _academicae quaestiones_ of cicero,
[6] saying that he adopted this method in the hope of enticing the
unlearned to read something that might profit them. in these _saturae_
topics were handled with the greatest freedom. they were not satires in
the modern sense. they are rather to be considered as lineal descendants
of the old _saturae_ which existed before any regular literature. they
nevertheless embodied with unmistakable clearness varro's sentiments with
regard to the prevailing luxury, and combined his thorough knowledge of
all that best befitted a roman to know with a racy freshness which we miss
in his later works. the titles of many are preserved, and give some index
to the character of the contents. we have some in greek, _e.g._
marco_polis_ or _peri archaes_, a sort of varro's republic, after the
manner of plato; _hippokyon_, _kynoppaetor_, and others, satirizing the
cynic philosophy. some both in greek and latin, as _columnae herculis,
peri doxaes_; _est modus matulae, peri methaes_; others in latin only, as
_marcipor_ the slave of marcus (_i.e._ varro himself). many are in the
shape of proverbs, e.g. _longe fugit qui suos fugit_, _gnothi seauton_,
_nescis quid vesper serus vehat_. only two fragments are of any length;
one from the _marcipor_, in graceful iambic verse, [7] the other in prose
from the _nescis quid vesper_. [8] it consists of directions for a
convivial meeting: "nam multos convivas esse non convenit, quod _turba_
plerumque est _turbulenta_; et romae quidem constat: sed et athenis;
nusquam enim plures cubabant. [9] ipsum deinde convivium constat ex rebus
quatuor, et tum denique omnibus suis numeris absolutum est; si belli
homuculi collecti sunt, si lectus locus, si tempus lectum, si apparatus
non neglectus. nec loquaces autem convivas nec mutos legere oportet; quia
eloquentia in foro et apud subsellia; silentium vero non in convivio sed
in cubiculo esse debet. quod profecto eveniet, si de id genus rebus ad
communem vitae usum pertinentibus confabulemur, de quibus in foro atque in
negotiis agendis loqui non est otium. dominum autem convivii esse oportet
non tam _tautum_ quam _sine sordibus_. et in convivio legi non omnia
debent, sed ea potissimum quae simul sunt _biophelae_, [10] et delectent
potius, ut id quoque videatur non superfuisse. bellaria ea maxime sunt
_mellita_, quae _mellita_ non sunt, _pemmasin_ entra et _pepsei_ societas
infida." in this piece we see the fondness for punning, which even in his
eightieth year had not left him. the last pun is not at first obvious; the
meaning is that the nicest sweetmeats are those which are not too sweet,
for made dishes are hostile to digestion; or, as we may say, paraphrasing
his diction, "delicacies are conducive to delicacy." it was from this
_satura_ the celebrated rule was taken that guests should be neither fewer
than the graces, nor more than the muses. the whole subject of the
menippean satires is brilliantly treated in mommsen's _history of rome_,
and riese's edition of the satires, to both which, if he desire further
information, we refer the reader. [11]

the genius of varro, however, more and more inclined him to prose. the
next series of works that issued from his pen were probably those known as
_logistorici_ (about 56-50 b.c.). the model for these was furnished by
heraclides ponticus, a friend and pupil of plato, and after his death, of
aristotle. he was a voluminous and encyclopaedic writer, but too indolent
to apply the vigorous method of his master. hence his works, being
discursive and easily understood, were well fitted for the comprehension
of the romans. varro's histories were short, mostly taken from his own or
his friends' experience, and centred round some principle of ethics or
economics. _catus de liberis educandis_, _marius de fortuna_, &c. are
titles which remind us of cicero's _laelius de amicitia_ and _cato major
de senectute_, of which it is extremely probable they were the suggesting
causes.

varro in his _saturae_ is very severe upon philosophers. he had almost as
great a contempt for them as his archetype cato. and yet varro was deeply
read in the philosophy of greece. he did not yield to cicero in admiration
of her illustrious thinkers. it is probable that with his keen
appreciation of the roman character he saw that it was unfitted for
speculative thought; that in most cases its cultivation would only bring
forth pedants or hypocrites. when asked by cicero why he had not written a
great philosophical work, he replied that those who had a real interest in
the study would go direct to the fountain head, those who had not would be
none the better for reading a latin compendium. hence he preferred to turn
his labours into a more productive channel, and to instruct the people in
their own antiquities, which had never been adequately studied, and, now
that stilo was dead, seemed likely to pass into oblivion. [12] his
researches occupied three main fields, that of law and religion, that of
civil history and biography, and that of philology.

of these the first was the one for which he was most highly qualified, and
in which he gained his highest renown. his crowning work in this
department was the _antiquities divine and human_, in 41 books. [13] this
was the greatest monument of roman learning, the reference book for all
subsequent writers. it is quoted continually by pliny, gellius, and
priscian; and, what is more interesting to us, by st augustine in the
fifth and seventh books of his _civitas dei_, as the one authoritative
work on the subject of the national religion. [14] he thus describes the
plan of the work. it consisted of 41 books; 25 of human antiquities, 16 of
divine. in the human part, 6 books were given to each of the four
divisions; viz. of agents, of places, of times, of things. [15] to these
24 one prefatory chapter was prefixed of a general character, thus
completing the number. in the divine part a similar method was followed.
three books were allotted to each of the five divisions of the subject,
viz. the men who sacrifice, the places, and times of worship, [16] the
rites performed, and finally the divine beings themselves. to these was
prefixed a book treating the subject comprehensively, and of a prefatory
nature. the five triads were thus subdivided: the first into a book on
_pontifices_, one on augurs, one on _quindecimviri sacrorum_; the second
into books on shrines, temples, and sacred spots, respectively; the third
into those on festivals and holidays, the games of the circus, and
theatrical spectacles; the fourth treats of consecrations, private rites,
and public sacrifices, while the fifth has one treatise on gods that
certainly exist, one on gods that are doubtful, and one on the chief and
select deities.

we have given the particulars of this division to show the almost pedantic
love of system that varro indulged. nearly all his books were parcelled
out on a similar methodical plan. he had no idea of following the natural
divisions of a subject, but always imposed on his subject artificial
categories drawn from his own prepossessions. [17] the remark has been
made that of all romans varro was the most unphilosophical. certainly if a
true classification be the basis of a truly scientific treatment, varro
can lay no claim to it. his erudition, though, profound, is cumbrous. he
never seems to move easily in it. his illustrations are far-fetched, often
inopportune. what, for instance, can be more out of place than to bring to
a close a discussion on farming by the sudden announcement of a hideous
murder? [18] his style is as uncouth as his arrangement is unnatural. it
abounds in constructions which cannot be justified by strict rules of
syntax, _e.g._ "_hi qui pueros in ludum mittunt, idem barbatos ... non
docebimus?_" [19] "when we send our children to school to learn to speak
correctly, shall we not also correct bearded men, when they make
mistakes?" slipshod constructions like this occur throughout the treatise
on the latin tongue, though, it is true, they are almost entirely absent
from that on husbandry, which is a much more finished work. obscurity in
explaining what the author means, or in describing what he has seen, is so
frequent an accompaniment of vast erudition that it need excite little
surprise. and yet how different it is from the matchless clearness of
cicero or caesar! in the treatise on husbandry, varro is at great pains to
describe a magnificent aviary in his villa at casinum, but his auditors
must have been clear-headed indeed if they could follow his description.
[20] and in the _de lingua latina_, wishing to show how the elephant was
called _luca bos_ from having been first seen in lucania with the armies
of pyrrhus, and from the ox being the largest quadruped with which the
italians were then acquainted, he gives us the following involved note--
_in virgilii commentario erat: ab lucanis lucas; ab eo quod nostri, quom
maximam quadrupedem, quam ipsi haberent, vocarent bovem, et in lucanis
pyrrhi bello primum vidissent apud hostes elephantos, lucanum bovem quod
putabant lucam bovem appellassent_.

in fact varro was no stylist. he was a master of facts, as cicero of
words. _studiosum rerum_, says augustine, _tantum docet, quantum studiosum
verborum cicero delectat_. hence cicero, with all his proneness to
exaggerate the excellences of his friends, never speaks of him as
eloquent. he calls him _omnium facile acutissimus, et sine ulla
dubitatione doctissimus_. [21] the qualities that shone out conspicuously
in his works were, besides learning, a genial though somewhat caustic
humour, and a thorough contempt for effeminacy of all kinds. the fop, the
epicure, the warbling poet who gargled his throat before murmuring his
recondite ditty, the purist, and above all the mock-philosopher with his
nostrum for purifying the world, these are all caricatured by varro in his
pithy, good-humoured way; the spirit of the menippean satires remained,
though the form was changed to one more befitting the grave old teacher of
wisdom. the fragments of his works as well as the notices of his friends
present him to us the very picture of a healthy-minded and healthy-bodied
man.

to return to the consideration of his treatise on antiquities, from which
we have digressed. the great interest of the subject will be our excuse
for dwelling longer upon it. there is no latin book the recovery of which
the present century would hail with so much pleasure as this. when
antiquarianism is leading to such fruitful results, and the study of
ancient religion is so earnestly pursued, the aid of varro's research
would be invaluable. and it is the more disappointing to lose it, since we
have reason for believing that it was in existence during the lifetime of
petrarch. he declares that he saw it when a boy, and afterwards, when he
knew its value, tried all means, but without success, to obtain it. this
story has been doubted, chiefly on the ground that direct quotations from
the work are not made after the sixth century. but this by itself is
scarcely a sufficient reason, since the church gathered all the knowledge
of it she required from the writings of st augustine. from him we learn
that varro feared the entire collapse of the old faith; that he attributed
its decline in some measure to the outward representations of divine
objects; and, observing that rome had existed 170 years without any image
in her temples, instanced judea to prove "_eos qui primi simulacra deorum
populis posuerunt, eos civitatibus suis et metum dempsisse, et errorem
addidisse_." [22] other fragments of deep interest are preserved by
augustine. one, showing the conception of the state religion as a purely
human institution, explains why human antiquities are placed before
divine, "_sicut prior est pictor quam tabula picta, prior faber quam
aedificium; ita priores sunt civitates, quam ea quae a civitatibus
instituta sunt._" another describes the different classes of theology,
according to a division first made by the pontifex scaevola, [23] as
poetical, philosophical, and political, or as mythical, physical, and
civil. [24] against the first of these varro fulminated forth all the
shafts of his satire: _in eo multa sunt contra dignitatem et naturam
immortalium ficta ... quae non modo in hominem, sed etiam quae in
contemptissimum hominem cadere possunt_. about the second he did not say
much, except guardedly to imply that it was not fitted for a popular
ceremonial. the third, which it was his strong desire to keep alive, as it
was afterwards that of virgil, seemed to him the chief glory of rome. he
did not scruple to say (and polybius had said it before him) that the
grandeur of the republic was due to the piety of the republic. it was
reserved for the philosopher of a later age [25] to asperse with bitter
ridicule ceremonies to which all before him had conformed while they
disbelieved, and had respected while seeing through their object.

varro dedicated his work to caesar, who was then pontifex maximus, and
well able to appreciate the chain of reasoning it contained. the acute
mind of varro had doubtless seen in caesar a disposition to rehabilitate
the fallen ceremonial, and foreseeing his supremacy in the state, had laid
before him this great manual for his guidance. caesar evinced the deepest
respect for varro, and must have carefully studied his views. at least it
can be no mere coincidence that augustus, in carrying out his
predecessor's plans for the restoration of public worship, should have
followed so closely on the lines which we see from augustine varro struck
out. to consider varro's labours as undirected to any practical object
would be to misinterpret them altogether. no man was less of the mere
_savant_ or the mere _litterateur_ than he.

besides this larger work varro seems to have written smaller ones, as
introductions or pendants to it. among these were the _aitia_, or
_rationale_ of roman manners and customs, and a work _de gente populi
romani_, the most noticeable feature of which was its chronological
calculation, which fixed the building of rome to the date now generally
received, and called the varronian era (753 b.c.). it contained also
computations and theories with regard to the early history of many other
states with which rome came in contact, _e.g._ athens, argos, etc., and is
referred to more than once by st augustine. [26] the names of many other
treatises on this subject are preserved; and this is not surprising, when
we learn that no less than 620 books belonging to 74 different works can
be traced to his indefatigable pen, so that, as an ancient critic says,
"so much has he written that it seems impossible he could have read
anything, so much has he read that it seems incredible he could have
written anything."

in the domain of history and biography he was somewhat less active. he
wrote, however, memoirs of his campaigns, and a short biography of pompey.
a work of his, first mentioned by cicero, to which peculiar interest
attaches, is the _imagines_ or _hebdomades_, called by cicero
"_peplographia_ varronis." [27] it was a series of portraits--700 in all--
of greek and roman celebrities, [28] with a short biography attached to
each, and a metrical epigram as well. this was intended to be, and soon
became, a popular work. an abridged edition was issued shortly after the
first, 39 b.c. no doubt to meet the increased demand. this work is
mentioned by pliny as embodying a new and most acceptable process, [29]
whereby the impressions of the portraits were multiplied, and the reading
public could acquaint themselves with the physiognomy and features of
great men. [30] what this process was has been the subject of much doubt.
some think it was merely an improved method of miniature drawing, others,
dwelling on the general acceptableness of the invention, strongly contend
that it was some method of multiplying the portraits like that of copper
or wood engraving, and this seems by far the most probable view; but what
the method was the notices are much too vague for us to determine.

the next works to be noticed are those on practical science. as far as we
can judge he seems to have imitated cato in bringing out a kind of
encyclopaedia, adapted for general readers. augustine speaks of him as
having exhaustively treated the whole circle of the liberal, or as he
prefers to call it, the secular arts. [31] those to which most weight were
attached would seem to have been grammar, rhetoric, arithmetic, medicine,
and geometry. from one or two passages that are preserved, we should be
inclined to fancy that varro attached a superstitious (almost a
pythagorean) importance to numbers. [32] he himself was not an adherent of
any system, but as mommsen quaintly expresses it, he led a blind dance
between them all, veering now to one now to another, as he wished to avoid
any unpleasant conclusion or to catch at some attractive idea. not
strictly connected with the _encyclopaedia_, but going to some extent over
the same ground though in a far more thorough and systematic way, was the
great treatise _de lingua latina_, in twenty-five books, of which the
first four were dedicated to septimius, the last twenty-one (to the
orator's infinite delight) to cicero. few things gave cicero greater
pleasure than this testimony of varro's regard. with his insatiable
appetite for praise, he could not but observe with regret that varro,
trusted by pompey, courted by caesar, and reverenced by all alike, had
never made any confidential advances to him. probably the deeply-read
student and simple-natured man failed to appreciate the more brilliant, if
less profound, scholarship of the orator, and the vacillation and
complexity of his character. while cicero loaded him with praises and
protestations of friendship, varro appears to have maintained a somewhat
cool or distant attitude. at last, however, this reserve was broken
through. in 47 b.c. he seems to have promised cicero to dedicate a work to
him, which by its magnitude and interest required careful labour. in the
letter prefixed to the posterior _academica_, 45 b.c., cicero evinces much
impatience at having been kept two years waiting for his promised boon,
and inscribes his own treatise with varro's name as a polite reminder
which he hopes his friend will not think immodest. in the opening chapters
cicero extols varro's learning with that warmth of heart and total absence
of jealousy which form so pleasing a trait in his character. their
diffuseness amusingly contrasts with varro's brevity in his dedication.
when it appeared, there occurred not a word of compliment, nothing beyond
the bare announcement _in his ad te scribam_. [33] truly varro was no
"mutual admirationist."

c. o. muller, who has edited this treatise with great care, is of opinion
that it was never completely finished. he argues partly from the words
_politius a me limantur_, put into varro's mouth by cicero, partly from
the civil troubles and the perils into which varro's life was placed,
partly from the loose unpolished character of the work, that it represents
a first draught intended, but not ready for, publication. for example, the
same thing is treated more than once; _jubar_ is twice illustrated by the
same quotation, [34] _canis_ is twice derived from _canere_; [35] _merces_
is differently explained in two places; [36] _lympha_ is derived both from
_lapsus aquae_, and from _nympha_; [37] _valicinari_ from _vesanus_ and
_versibus viendis_. [38] again marginal additions or corrections, which
have been the means of destroying the syntactical connection, seemed to
have been placed in the text by the author. [39] other insertions of a
more important character though they illustrate the point, yet break the
thread of thought; and in one book, the seventh, the want of order is so
apparent that its finished character could hardly be maintained. these
facts lead him to conclude that the book was published without his
knowledge, and perhaps against his will, by those who pillaged his
library. it is obvious that this is a theory which can neither be proved
nor disproved. it is an ingenious excuse for varro's negligence in not
putting his excellent materials together with more care. the plan of the
work is as follows:--

book i.--on the origin of the latin language.

books ii.-vii. first part.--on the imposition of names.
thus subdivided--
_a_ ii-iv. on etymology.    ii. what can be said against it.
                           iii. what can be said for it.
                            iv. about its form and character.
_b_ v.-vii. origin of words. v. names of places and all that is in them.
                            vi. names of time, things that happen in time, &c.
                           vii. poetical words.

books viii.-xiii. second part.--on declension and inflection.
again subdivided--
_a_ viii.-x. the general method (_disciplina_) of declension.
                          viii. against a universal analogy obtaining.
                            ix. in favour of it.
                             x. on the theory of declension.
_b_ xi.-xiii. on the special declensions.

books xiv.-xxv. third part.--on syntax (_quemadmodum verba inter se
coniungantur_).

of this elaborate treatise only books v.-x. remain, and those in a
mutilated and unsatisfactory condition, so that we are unable to form a
clear idea of the value of the whole. moreover, much of what we have is
rendered useless, except for antiquarian purposes, by the extremely crude
notions of etymology displayed. _caelum_ is from _cavus_, or from _chaos_;
_terra_ from _teri, quia teritur_; _sol_ from _solus_; _lepus_ from
_levipes_, &c. the seventh book must always be a repertory of interesting
quotations, many of which are not found elsewhere; and the essay on
_analogia_ in books ix. and x. is well worthy of study, as showing on what
sort of premises the ancients formed their grammatical reasonings. the
work on grammar was followed or preceded by another on philosophy on a
precisely similar plan. this was studied, like so many of his other works,
by tertullian, jerome, and augustine. its store of facts was no doubt
remarkable, but as a popular exposition of philosophical ideas, it must
have been very inferior to the treatises of cicero.

the last or nearly the last book he wrote was the treatise on agriculture,
_de re rustica_, which has fortunately come down to us entire; and with
the kindred works of cato and columella, forms one of the most deeply
interesting products of the roman mind. it is in three books: the first
dedicated to his wife fundania, the second to turanius niger, the third to
pinnius. varro was in his 81st year when he drew upon his memory and
experience for this congenial work, 36 b.c. the destruction of his library
had thrown him on his own resources to a great extent; nevertheless, the
amount of book-lore which he displays in this dialogue is enormous. the
design is mapped out, as in his other treatises, with stately precision.
he meets some friends at the temple of tellus by appointment with the
sacristan, "_ab_ aeditimo, _ut dicere didicimus a patribus nostris; ut
corrigimur ab recentibus urbanis, ab_ aedituo." these friends' names,
fundanius, agrius, and agrasius, suggest the nature of the conversation,
which turns mainly on the purchase and cultivation of land and stock. they
are soon joined by licinius stolo and tremellius scrofa, the last-
mentioned being the highest living authority on agricultural matters. the
conversation is carried on with zest, and somewhat more naturally than in
cicero's dialogues. a warm eulogy is passed on the soil, climate, and
cultivation of italy, the whole party agreeing that it exceeds in natural
blessings all other lands. the first book contains directions for raising
crops of all kinds as well as vegetables and flowers, and is brought to an
abrupt termination by the arrival of the priest's freedman who narrates
the murder of his master. the party promise to attend the funeral, and
with the sarcastic reflection _de casu humano magis querentes quam
admirantes id romae factum_, the book ends. the next treats of stock (_de
re pecuaria_), and one or two new personages are introduced, as mennas,
murius, and vaccius (the last, of course, taking on himself to speak of
kine), and ends with an account of the dairy and sheep-shearing. the third
is devoted to an account of the preserves (_de villicis pastionibus_)
which includes aviaries, whether for pleasure or profit, fish-tanks, deer-
forests, rabbit-warrens, and all such luxuries of a country house as are
independent of tillage or pasturage--and a most brilliant catalogue it is.
as varro and his friends, most of whom are called by the names of birds
(merula, pavo, pica, and passer), discourse to one another of their
various country seats, and as they mention those of other senators, more
or less splendid than their own, we recognise the pride and grandeur of
those few roman families who at this time parcelled out between them the
riches of the world. varro, whose life had been peaceful and unambitious,
had realized enough to possess three princely villas, in one of which
there was a marble aviary, with a duck-pond, bosquet, rosary, and two
spacious colonnades attached, in which were kept, solely for the master's
pleasure, 3000 of the choicest songsters of the wood. that grosser taste
which fattened these beautiful beings for the table or the market was
foreign to him; as also was the affectation which had made hortensius
sacrifice his career to the enjoyment of his pets. there is something
almost terrible in the thought that the costly luxuries of which these
haughty nobles talk with so much urbanity, were wrung from the wretched
provincials by every kind of extortion and excess; that bribes of untold
value passed from the hands of cringing monarchs into those of violent
proconsuls, to minister to the lust and greed, or at best to the wanton
luxury, of a small governing class. in varro's pleasant dialogue we see
the bright side of the picture; in the speeches of cicero the dark side.
doubtless there is a charm about the lofty pride that brooks no superior
on earth, and almost without knowing it, treats other nations as mere
ministers to its comfort: but the nemesis was close at hand; those who
could not stoop to assist as seconds in the work of government must lie as
victims beneath the assassin's knife or the heel of the upstart freedman.

the style of this work is much more pleasing than that of the _latin
language_. it is brisk and pointed, and shows none of the signs of old
age. it abounds with proverbs, [40] patriotic reflections, and ancient
lore, [41] but is nevertheless disfigured with occasional faults,
especially the uncritical acceptance of marvels, such as the impregnation
of mares by the wind [42] ("_an incredible thing but nevertheless true_");
the production of bees from dead meat (both of which puerilities are
repeated unquestioningly by virgil), the custom of wolves plunging swine
into cold water to cool their flesh which is so hot as to be otherwise
quite uneatable, and of shrew mice occasionally gnawing a nest for
themselves and rearing their young in the hide of a fat sow, &c. [43] he
also attempts one or two etymologies; the best is _via_ which he tells us
is for _veha_, and _villa_ for _vehula_; _capra_ from _capere_ is less
plausible. altogether this must be placed at the head of the roman
treatises on husbandry as being at once the work of a man of practical
experience, which cato was, and columella was not, and of elegant and
varied learning, to which columella might, but cato could not, pretend.
there is, indeed, rather too great a parade of erudition, so much so as
occasionally to encumber the work; but the general effect is very
pleasing, and more particularly the third book, which shows us the calm
and innocent life of one, who, during the turbulent and bloody climax of
political strife, sought in the great recollections of the past a solace
for evils which he was powerless to cure, and whose end he could not
foresee.


appendix.

note i.--_the menippean satires of varro._

the reader will find all the information on this subject in riese's
edition of the _menippean satires_, leipsic, 1865. we append a few
fragments showing their style, language, and metrical treatment.

(1) from the _ammon metreis_.

  "quem secuntur eum rutundis velitis leves parmis
  ante signani quadratis multisignibus tecti."

we observe here the rare rhythm, analogous to the iambic scazon, of a
trochaic tetrameter with a long penultimate syllable.

(2) from the _anthropopolis_.

  "non fit thesauris non auro pectu' solutum;
  non demunt animis curas et religiones
  persarum montes, non atria diviti' crassi."

the style here reminds us strongly of horace.

(3) from the _bimarcus_.

  "tunc repente caelitum altum tonitribus templum tonescat,
  et pater divon trisu cum fulmen igni fervido actum
  mutat in tholum macelli."

(4) from the _dolium aut seria_, in anapaestics.

  "mundus domus est maxima homulli
  quam quinque altitonae flammigerae
  zonae cingunt per quam limbus
  bis sex signis stellumicantibus
  aptus in obliquo aethere lunae
  bigas acceptat."

the sentiment reminds us of plato.

(5) from the _est modus matulae_, on wine.

  "vino nihil iucundius quisquam bibit
  hoc aegritudinem ad medendam invenerunt,
  hoc hilaritatis dulce seminarium,
  hoc continet coagulum convivia."

(6) from the _eumenides_, in galliambics, from which those of catullus may
be a study.

  "tibi typana non inanes sonitus matri' deum
  tonimu', canimu' tibi nos tibi nunc semiviti;
  teretem cornam volantem iactant tibi galli."

(7) from the _marcipor_, a fine description.

  "repente noctis circiter meridie
  cum pictus aer fervidis late ignibus
  caeli chorean astricen ostenderet
  nubes aquali frigido velo leves
  caeli cavernas aureas subduxerant
  aquam vomentes inferam mortalibus
  ventique frigido se ab axe eruperant,
  phrenetici septentrionum filii
  secum ferentes regulas ramos syrus.
  at nos caduci naufragi ut ciconiae,
  quarum bipinnis fulminis plumas vapor
  percussit, alte maesti in terram cecidimus."


note ii.--_the logistorici_.

the _logistorici_, which, as we have said, were imitated from heraclides
ponticus, are alluded to under the name _hrakleideion_ by cicero. he says
(att. xv. 27, 2), _excudam aliquid hrakleideion, quod lateat in thesauris
tuis_ (xvi. 2, 5) _hrakleideion, si brundisium salvi, adoriemur._ in xvi.
3, 1, he alludes to the work as his _cato major de senectute_. varro had
promised him a _hrakleideion_. _varro ... a quo adhuc_ hr. _illud non
abstuli_ (xvi. 11, 3). he received it (xvi. 12).


note iii.--_some fragments of varro atacinus._

this poet, who is by later writers often confounded with varro reatinus,
was much more finished in his style, and therefore more read by the
augustan writers. frequently when they speak of varro it is to him that
they refer. we append some passages from his _chorographia_.

  i.

  "vidit et aetherio mundum torquerier axe
  et septem aeternis sonitum dare vocibus orbes,
  nitentes aliis alios quae maxima divis
  laetitia est. at tunc longe gratissima phoebi
  dextera consimiles meditator reddere voces."

  ii.

  "ergo inter solis stationem ad sidera septem
  exporrecta iacet tellus: huic extima fluctu
  oceani, interior neptuno cingitur ora."

  iii.

  "at quinque aethertis zonis accingitur orbis
  ac vastant mas hiemes mediamque calores:
  sed terrae extremas inter mediamque coluntur
  quas solis valido numquam vis atterat igne'."

from the _ephemeris_, two passages which virgil has copied.

  i.

  "tum liceat pelagi volucres tardaeqne paludis
  cernere inexpleto studio gestire lavandi
  et velut insolitum pennis infundere rorem.
  aut arguta lacus circumvolitavit hirando."

  ii.

  "et vos suspiciens caelum (mirabile visu)
  naribus aerium patulis decerpsit odorem,
  nec tenuis formica cavis non erebit ova."

an epigram attributed to him, but probably of somewhat later date, is as
follows:

  "marmoreo licinus tumulo iacet, at cato parvo;
  pompeius nullo. ciedimus esse deos?"


note iv.--_on the jurists, critics, and grammarians of less note._

the study of law had received a great impulse from the labours of
scaevola. but among his successors none can be named beside him, though
many attained to a respectable eminence. the business of public life had
now become so engrossing that statesmen had no leisure to study law
deeply, nor jurists to devote themselves to politics. hence there was a
gradual divergence between the two careers, and universal principles began
to make themselves felt in jurisprudence. the chief name of this period is
_sulpicius rufus_ (born 105 b.c.), who is mentioned with great respect in
cicero's _brutus_ as a high-minded man and a cultivated student. his
contribution lay rather in methodical treatment than in amassing new
material. speeches are also attributed to him (quint. iv. 2, 106), though
sometimes there is an uncertainty whether the older orator is not meant.
letters of his are preserved among those of cicero, and show the extreme
purity of language attained by the highly educated (ad fam. iv. 5). other
jurists are _p. orbius_, a pupil of _juventius_, of whom cicero thought
highly; _ateius_, probably the father of that ateius capito who obtained
great celebrity in the next period, and _pacuvius labeo_, whose fame was
also eclipsed by that of his son. somewhat later we find _c. trebatius_,
the friend of cicero and recipient of some of his most interesting
letters. he was a brilliant but not profound lawyer, and devoted himself
more particularly to the pontifical law. his dexterous conduct through the
civil wars enabled him to preserve his influence under the reign of
augustus. horace professes to ask his advice (sat. ii. 1, 4):

        "docte trebati
  quid faciam, praescribe."

trebatius replies: "cease to write, or if you cannot do that, celebrate
the exploits of caesar." this courtier-like counsel is characteristic of
the man, and helps to explain the high position he was enabled to take
under the empire. two other jurists are worthy of mention, _a.
cascellius_, a contemporary of trebatius, and noted for his sarcastic wit;
and _q. aelius tubero_, who wrote also on history and rhetoric, but
finally gave himself exclusively to legal studies.

among grammatical critics, the most important is _p. nigidius figulus_
(98-46 b.c.). he was, like varro, conservative in his views, and is
considered by gellius to come next to him in erudition. they appear to
have been generally coupled together by later writers, but probably from
the similarity of their studies rather than from any equality of talent.
nigidius was a mystic, and devoted much of his time to pythagorean
speculations, and the celebration of various religious mysteries. his
_commentarii_ treated of grammar, orthography, etymology, &c. in the
latter he appears to have copied varro in deriving all latin words from
native roots. besides grammar, he wrote on sacrificial rites, on theology
(_de dis_), and natural science. one or two references are made to him in
the curious _apology_ of apuleius. in the investigation of the
supernatural he was followed by _caecina_, who wrote on the etruscan
ceremonial, and drew up a theory of portents and prodigies.

the younger generation produced few grammarians of merit. we hear of
_ateius praetextatus_, who was equally well known as a rhetorician. he was
born at athens, set free for his attainments, and called himself
_philologus_ (suet. de gram. 10). he seems to have had some influence with
the young nobles, with whom a teacher of grammar, who was also a fluent
and persuasive speaker, was always welcome. another instance is found in
_valerius cato_, who lost his patrimony when quite a youth by the rapacity
of sulla, and was compelled to teach in order to obtain a living. he
speedily became popular, and was considered an excellent trainer of poets.
he is called--

  "cato grammaticus, latina siren,
  qui solus legit et facit poetas."

having acquired a moderate fortune and bought a villa at tusculum, he sank
through mismanagement again into poverty, from which he never emerged, but
died in a garret, destitute of the necessaries of life. his fate was the
subject of several epigrams, of which one by bibaculus is preserved in
suetonius (de cr. ii).

the only other name worth notice is that of _santra_, who is called by
martial _salebrosus_. he seems to have written chiefly on the history of
roman literature, and, in particular, to have commented on the poems of
naevius. many obscurer writers are mentioned in suetonius's treatise, to
which, with that on rhetoric by the same author, the reader is here
referred.




chapter ii.

oratory and philosophy--cicero (106-43 b.c.).


marcus tullius cicero, [1] the greatest name in roman literature, was born
on his father's estate near arpinum, 3d jan. 106 b.c. arpinum had received
the citizenship some time before, but his family though old and of
equestrian position had never held any office in rome. cicero was
therefore a _novus homo_, a _parvenu_, as we should say, and this made the
struggle for honours which occupied the greater part of his career, both
unusual and arduous. for this struggle, in which his extraordinary talent
seemed to predict success, his father determined to prepare the boy by an
education under his own eye in rome. marcus lived there for some years
with his brother quintus, studying under the best masters (among whom was
the poet archias), learning the principles of grammar and rhetoric, and
storing his mind with the great works of greek literature. he now made the
acquaintance of the three celebrated men to whom he so often refers in his
writings, the augur mucius scaevola, and the orators crassus and antonius,
with whom he often conversed, and asked them such questions as his boyish
modesty permitted. at this time too he made his first essays in verse, the
poem called _pontius glaucus_, and perhaps the _phaenomena_ and
_prognostics_ [2] of aratus. on assuming the manly gown he at once
attached himself to scaevola for the purpose of learning law, attending
him not only in his private consultations, but also to the courts when he
pleaded, and to the assembly when he harangued the people. his industry
was untiring. as he tells us himself, he renounced dissipation, pleasure,
exercise, even society; his whole spare time was spent in reading,
writing, and declaiming, besides daily attendance at the forum, where he
drank in with eager zeal the fervid eloquence of the great speakers.
naturally keen to observe, he quickened his faculties by assiduous
attention; not a tone, not a gesture, not a turn of speech ever escaped
him; all were noted down in his ready memory to be turned to good account
when his own day should come. meanwhile he prepared himself by deeper
studies for rising to oratorical eminence. he attended the subtle lectures
of philo the academic, and practised the minute dialectic of the stoics
under diodotus, and tested his command over both philosophy and
disputation by declaiming in greek before the rhetorician molo.

at the age of twenty-five he thought himself qualified to appear before
the world. the speech for quintius, [3] delivered 81 b.c. is not his
first, but it is one of his earliest. in it he appears as the opponent of
hortensius. at this time sulla was all-powerful at rome. he had crushed
with pitiless ferocity the remnants of the marian party; he had reinstated
the senate in its privileges, abased the tribunate, checked the power of
the knights, and still swayed public opinion by a rule of terror. in his
twenty-seventh year, cicero, by defending s. roscius amerinus, [4] exposed
himself to the dictator's wrath. roscius, whose accuser was sulla's
powerful freedman chrysogonus, was, though innocent, in imminent danger of
conviction, but cicero's staunch courage and irresistible eloquence
procured his acquittal. the effect of this speech was instantaneous; the
young aspirant was at once ranked among the great orators of the day.

in this speech we see cicero espousing the popular side. the change which
afterwards took place in his political conduct may perhaps be explained by
his strong hatred on the one hand for personal domination, and by his
enthusiasm on the other for the great traditions of the past. averse by
nature to all extremes, and ever disposed towards the weaker cause, he
became a vacillating statesman, because his genius was literary not
political, and because (being a scrupulously conscientious man, and
without the inheritance of a family political creed to guide him) he found
it hard to judge on which side right lay. the three crises of his life,
his defence of roscius, his contest with catiline, and his resistance to
antony, were precisely the three occasions when no such doubts were
possible, and on all these the conduct of cicero, as well as his genius,
shines with its brightest lustre. to the speech for roscius, his first and
therefore his boldest effort, he always looked back with justifiable
pride, and drew from it perhaps in after life a spur to meet greater
dangers, greater because experience enabled him to foresee them. [5]

about this time cicero's health began to fail from too constant study and
over severe exertions in pleading. the tremendous calls on a roman
orator's physique must have prevented any but robust men from attaining
eminence. the place where he spoke, girt as it was with the proudest
monuments of imperial dominion, the assembled multitudes, the magnitude of
the political issues on which in reality nearly every criminal trial
turned, all these roused the spirit of the speaker to its utmost tension,
and awoke a corresponding vehemence of action and voice.

cicero therefore retired to athens, where he spent six months studying
philosophy with antiochus the academic, and with zeno and phaedrus who
were both epicureans. his brother quintus and his friend atticus were
fellow-students with him. he next travelled in asia minor, seeking the
help and advice of all the celebrated rhetoricians he met, as menippus of
stratonice, dionysius of magnesia, aeschylus of cnidos, xenocles of
adramyttium. at rhodes he again placed himself under molo, whose wise
counsel checked the asiatic exuberance which to his latest years cicero
could never quite discard; and after an absence of over two years he
returned home thoroughly restored in health, and steadily determined to
win his place as the greatest orator of rome (76 b.c.). meanwhile sulla
had died, and cicero no longer incurred danger by expressing his views. he
soon after defended the great comedian roscius [6] on a charge of fraud in
a civil speech still extant, and apparently towards the end of the same
year was married to terentia, a lady of high birth, with whom he lived for
upwards of thirty years.

in 75 b.c. cicero was elected quaestor, and obtained the province of
sicily under the praetor sextus peducaeus. while there he conciliated good
will by his integrity and kindness, and on his departure was loaded with
honours by the grateful provincials. but he saw the necessity of remaining
in rome for the future, if he wished to become known; consequently he took
a house near the forum, and applied himself unremittingly to the calls of
his profession. he was now placed on the list of senators, and in the year
70 appeared as a candidate for the aedileship. the only oration we know of
during the intervening years is that for tullius [7] (71 b.c.); but many
cases of importance must have been pleaded by him, since in the
preliminary speech by which he secured the conduct of the case against
verres, [8] he triumphantly brings himself forward as the only man whose
tried capacity and unfailing success makes him a match for hortensius, who
is retained on the other side. this year is memorable for the impeachment
of verres, the only instance almost where cicero acted as public
prosecutor, his kindly nature being apter to defend than to accuse; but on
this occasion he burned with righteous indignation, and spared no labour
or expense to ransack sicily for evidence of the infamous praetor's guilt.

cicero was tied to the sicilians, whom he called his clients, by acts of
mutual kindness, and he now stood forth to avenge them with a good will.
the friends of verres tried to procure a _praevaricatio_, or sham
accusation, conducted by a friend of the defendant, but cicero stopped
this by his brilliant and withering invective on caecilius, the unlucky
candidate for this dishonourable office. the judges, who were all
senators, could not but award the prosecution to cicero, who, determined
to obtain a conviction, conducted it with the utmost despatch. waiving his
right to speak, and bringing on the witnesses contrary to custom at the
outset of the trial, he produced evidence so crushing that verres
absconded, and the splendid orations which remain [9] had no occasion to
be, and never were, delivered. it was cicero's justifiable boast that he
obtained all the offices of state in the first year in which he could by
law hold them. in 69 b.c. he was elected at the head of the poll as curule
aedile, a post of no special dignity, something between that of a mayor
and a commissioner of works, but admitting a liberal expenditure on the
public shows, and so useful towards acquiring the popularity necessary for
one who aspired to the consulship. to this year are to be referred the
extant speeches for fonteius [10] and caecina, [11] and perhaps the lost
ones for matridius [12] and oppius. [13] cicero contrived without any
great expenditure to make his aedileship a success. the people were well
disposed to him, and regarded him as their most brilliant representative.

the next year (68 b.c.) is important for the historian as that in which
begins cicero's correspondence--a mine of information more trustworthy
than anything else in the whole range of antiquity, and of exquisite
latinity, and in style unsurpassed and unsurpassable. the wealth that had
flowed in from various sources, such as bequests, presents from foreign
potentates or grateful clients at home, loans probably from the same
source, to which we must add his wife's considerable dowry, he proceeded
to expend in erecting a _villa_ at tusculum. such villas were the fairest
ornaments of italy, "_ocelli italiae_," as cicero calls them, and their
splendour may be inferred from the descriptions of varro and pliny.
cicero's, however, though it contained choice works of art and many rare
books, could not challenge comparison with those of great nobles such as
catulus, lucullus, or crassus, but it was tastefully laid out so as to
resemble in miniature the academy of athens, where several of his happiest
hours had been spent, and to which in thought he often returned. later in
life he purchased other country-seats at antium, asturia, sinuessa,
arpinum, formiae, cumae, puteoli, and pompeii; but the tusculan was always
his favourite.

in the year 67 cicero stood for the praetorship, the election to which was
twice put off, owing to the disturbances connected with gabinius' motion
for giving the command of the mediterranean to pompey, and that of otho
for assigning separate seats in the theatre to the knights. but the third
election ratified the results of the two previous ones, and brought in
cicero with a large majority as _praetor urbanus_ over the heads of seven,
some of them very distinguished, competitors. he entered on his office 66
b.c. and signalised himself by his high conduct as a judge; but this did
not, however, prevent him from exercising his profession as an advocate,
for in this year he defended fundanius [14] in a speech now lost, and
cluentius [15] (who was accused of poisoning) in an extremely long and
complicated argument, one of the most difficult, but from the light it
throws on the depraved morals of the time one of the most important of all
his speeches. another oration belonging to this year, and the first
political harangue which cicero delivered, was that in favour of the
manilian law, [16] which conferred on pompey the conduct of the war
against mithridates. the bill was highly popular; caesar openly favoured
it, and cicero had no difficulty in carrying the entire assembly with him.
it is a singularly happy effort of his eloquence, and contains a noble
panegyric on pompey, the more admirable because there was no personal
motive behind it. at the expiration of his praetorian year he had the
option of a province, which was a means of acquiring wealth eagerly
coveted by the ambitious; but cicero felt the necessity of remaining at
rome too strongly to be tempted by such a bribe. "out of sight, out of
mind," was nowhere so true as at rome. if he remained away a year, who
could tell whether his chance for the consulship might not be
irretrievably compromised?

in the following year (65 b.c.) he announced himself as a candidate for
this, the great object of his ambition, and received from his brother some
most valuable suggestions in the essay or letter known as _de petitione
consulatus_. this _manual_ (for so it might be called) of _electioneering
tactics_, gives a curious insight into the customs of the time, and in
union with many shrewd and pertinent remarks, contains independent
testimony to the evil characters of antony and catiline. but cicero relied
more on his eloquence than on the arts of canvassing. it was at this
juncture that he defended the ex-tribune cornelius, [17] who had been
accused of _maiestas_, with such surpassing skill as to draw forth from
quintilian a special tribute of praise. this speech is unfortunately lost.
his speech _in the white gown_, [18] of which a few fragments are
preserved by asconius, was delivered the following year, only a few days
before the election, to support the senatorial measure for checking
corrupt canvassing. when the _comitia_ were held, cicero was elected by a
unanimous vote, a fact which reflects credit upon those who gave it. for
the candidate to whom they did honour had no claims of birth, or wealth,
or military glory; he had never flattered them, never bribed them; his
sole title to their favour was his splendid genius, his unsullied
character, and his defence of their rights whenever right was on their
side. the only trial at which cicero pleaded during this year was that of
q. gellius, [19] in which he was successful.

the beginning of his consulship (63 b.c.) was signalised by three great
oratorical displays, viz. the speeches against the agrarian law of rullus
[20] and the extempore speech delivered on behalf of roscius otho. the
populace on seeing otho enter the theatre, rose in a body and greeted him
with hisses: a tumult ensued; cicero was sent for; he summoned the people
into an adjoining temple, and rebuked them with such sparkling wit as to
restore completely their good humour. it is to this triumph of eloquence
that virgil is thought to refer in the magnificent simile (_aen._ i. 148):

  "ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
  seditio, saevitque animis ignobile volgus;
  iamque faces et saxa volant, furor arma ministrat;
  tum pietate gravem ac meritis si forte virum quem
  aspexere silent arrectisque auribus adstant;
  ille regit dictis animos et pectora mulcet."

the next speech, which still remains to us, is a defence of the senator
rabirius; [21] that on behalf of calpurnius piso is lost. [22] but the
efforts which make this year forever memorable are the four orations
against catiline. [23] these were almost extemporaneous, and in their
trenchant vigour and terrible mastery of invective are unsurpassed except
by the second philippic. in the very heat of the crisis, however, cicero
found time to defend his friend muraena [2] in a brilliant and jocose
speech, which shows the marvellous versatility of the man. that warm
italian nature, open to every gust of feeling, over which impressions came
and went like summer clouds, could turn at a moment's notice from the
hand-to-hand grapple of a deadly duel to the lightest and most delicate
rapier practice of the fencing school.

as soon as cicero retired from office (62 b.c.) he found enemies ready to
accuse him. metellus the tribune declared that he had violated the
constitution. cicero replied to him in a spirited speech, which he alludes
to under the name _oratio metellina_, but he felt himself on insecure
ground. catiline was indeed crushed, but the ramifications of the
conspiracy extended far and wide. autronius and sulla were implicated in
it; the former cicero refused to aid, the latter he defended in a speech
which is lost to us. [25] the only other speech of this year is that on
behalf of the poet archias, [26] who had been accused of usurping the
rights of a roman citizen. in the following year (61 b.c.) occurred the
scandal about clodius. this profligate demagogue would have been acquitted
on an _alibi_, had it not been for cicero's damaging evidence; he
nevertheless contrived to procure a final acquittal by the most abominable
means, but determined to wreak his vengeance by working cicero's ruin. to
this resolution the personal taunts of the great orator no doubt
contributed. we have an account from cicero's pen of the scenes that took
place in the senate during the trial--the invectives poured forth by
clodius and the no less fiery retorts of his opponent. we must not imagine
our orator's talent as always finding vent in the lofty strain which we
are accustomed to associate with him. on the contrary, his attacks at
times were pitched in another key, and he would frequently exchange
sarcastic jests in a way that we should regard as incompatible with
decency, and almost with self-respect. on one occasion, for instance, he
had a skirmish of wit, which was vociferously applauded by an admiring
senate: "you have bought a house," says clodius. (we quote from forsyth.)
"one would think," rejoins cicero, "that you said i had bought a jury."
"they did not believe you on your oath!" exclaims clodius. "yes," retorted
cicero, "twenty-five of the jury did believe _me_, but thirty-one did not
believe _you_, for they took care to get their money beforehand!" these
and similar pleasantries, however they may have tickled the ears of the
senate, awoke in clodius an implacable hatred, which could only be
satisfied with cicero's fall; and the better to strike at him he made an
attempt (unsuccessful at first, but carried out somewhat later) to be made
a plebeian and elected tribune of the people (60 b.c.).

meanwhile cicero had returned to his profession, and defended scipio
nasica; [27] he had also composed a history of his consulship in greek, on
which (to use his own expression) he had emptied all the scent-boxes of
isocrates, and touched it lightly with the brush of aristotle; moreover,
he collected into one volume the speeches he had delivered as consul under
the title of _consular orations_. [28] at this time the coalition known as
the first triumvirate was formed, and cicero, disgusted at its
unscrupulous conduct, left rome for his tusculan villa, where he meditated
writing a work on universal geography. soon, however, impatient of
retirement, he returned to rome, defended a. themius [29] twice, and both
times successfully, and afterwards, aided by hortensius (with whose party
he had now allied himself), l. valerius flaccus (59 b.c.). [30]

but clodius's vengeance was by this time imminent, and pompey's assurances
did not quiet cicero's mind. he retired for some months to his antian
villa, and announced his intention of publishing a collection of anecdotes
of contemporary statesmen, in the style of theopompus, which would be, if
we possessed it, an extremely valuable work. on his return to rome (58
b.c.) he found the feeling strongly against him, and a bill of clodius's
was passed, interdicting him from fire and water, confiscating his
property, and outlawing his person. the pusillanimity he shows in his
exile exceeds even the measure of what we could have believed. it must be
remembered that the love of country was a passion with the ancients, to a
degree now difficult to realise; and exile from it, even for a time, was
felt to be an intolerable evil. but cicero's exile did not last long; in
august of the following year (57 b.c.) he was recalled with no dissentient
voice but that of clodius, and at once hastened to rome, where he
addressed the senate and people in terms of extravagant compliment. these
are the line speeches "on his return," [31] in the first of which he
thanks the senate, and in the second the people; in the third he addresses
the pontiffs, trying to persuade them that he has a right to reclaim the
site of his house, [32] in the fourth [33] which was delivered early the
next year, he rings the changes on the same subject.

the next year (56 b.c.) is signalised by several important speeches.
whatever we may think of his political conduct during this trying period,
his professional activity was most remarkable. he defended l. bestia [34]
(who was accused of electoral corruption when candidate for the
praetorship) but unsuccessfully; and also p. sextius, [35] on a charge of
bribery and illegal violence, in which he was supported by hortensius.
soon after we find him in the country in correspondence with lucceius, on
the subject of the history of his consulship; but he soon returned to rome
and before the year ended delivered his fine speech on the consular
provinces, [36] in which he opposed the curtailment of caesar's command in
gaul; and also that on behalf of coelius, [37] a lively and elegant
oration which has been quoted to prove that cicero was indifferent to
purity of morals, because he palliates as an advocate and a friend the
youthful indiscretions of his client.

in 55 b.c. he pleaded the cause of caninius gallus, [38] in a successful
speech now lost, and attacked the ex-consul piso [39] (who had long roused
his resentment) in terms of the most unmeasured and unworthy invective.
towards the close of the year he completed his great treatise, _de
oratore_, the most finished and faultless of all his compositions; and so
active was his mind at this epoch, that he offered to write a treatise on
britain, if quintus, who had been there with caesar, would furnish him
with the materials. his own poems, _de consulatu_ and _de temporibus suis_
had been completed before this, and, as we learn from the letters, were
highly approved by caesar. next year (54 b.c.) he defended plancius [40]
and scaurus, [41] the former of which orations is still extant; and later
on, rabirius postumus, [42] who was accused, probably with justice, of
extortion. this year had witnessed another change in cicero's policy; he
had transferred his allegiance from pompey to caesar. in 52 b.c. occurred
the celebrated trial of milo for the murder of clodius, in which cicero,
who appeared for the defendant, was hampered by the presence of pompey's
armed retainers, and made but a poor speech; the magnificent and
exhaustive oratorical display that we possess [43] having been written
after milo's condemnation and sent to him in his exile at marseilles,
where he received it with sarcastic praise. at the close of this year
cicero was appointed to the government of the province of cilicia, where
he conducted himself with an integrity and moderation little known to
roman pro-consuls, and returned in 50 b.c. scarcely richer than he had set
out.

during the following years cicero played a subordinate part. in the great
convulsions that were shaking the state men of a different sort were
required; men who possessed the first requisite for the statesman, the one
thing that cicero lacked, firmness. had cicero been as firm as he was
clear-sighted, he might have headed the statesmanship of rome. but while
he saw the drift of affairs he had not courage to act upon his insight; he
allowed himself to be made the tool, now of pompey, now of caesar, till
both were tired of him. "i wish," said pompey, when cicero joined him in
epirus, "that cicero would go over to the other side; perhaps he would
then be afraid of us." the only speeches we possess of this period were
delivered subsequently to the victorious entry of caesar, and exhibit a
prudent but most unworthy adulation. that for marcellus [44] (46 b.c.) was
uttered in the senate, and from its gross flattery of the dictator was
long supposed to be spurious; the others on behalf of ligarius [45] and
king deiotarus [46] are in a scarcely more elevated strain. cicero was
neither satisfied with himself nor with the world; he remained for the
most time in retirement, and devoted his energies to other literary
labours. but his absence had proved his value. no sooner is caesar dead
than he appears once more at the head of the state, and surpasses all his
former efforts in the final contest waged with the brutal and unscrupulous
antony. on the history of this eventful period we shall not touch, but
merely notice the fourteen glorious orations called _philippicae_ [47]
(after those of demosthenes), with which as by a bright halo he encircled
the closing period of his life.

the first was delivered in the senate (2d september, 44 b.c.) and in it
cicero, who had been persuaded by brutus, most fortunately for his glory,
to return to rome, excuses his long absence from affairs, and complains
with great boldness of antony's threatening attitude. this roused the
anger of his opponent, who delivered a fierce invective upon cicero, to
which the latter replied by that tremendous outburst of mingled
imprecation, abuse, self-justification, and exalted patriotism, which is
known as the second philippic. this was not published until antony had
left rome; but it is composed as if it had been delivered immediately
after the speech which provoked it. never in all the history of eloquence
has a traitor been so terribly denounced, an enemy so mercilessly
scourged. it has always been considered by critics as cicero's crowning
masterpiece. the other philippics, some of which were uttered in the
senate, while others were extempore harangues before the people, were
delivered in quick succession between december 44 b.c. and april 43 b.c.
they cost the orator his life. when antony and octavius entered rome
together, and each sacrificed his friends to the other's bloodthirsty
vengeance, cicero was surrendered by octavius to antony's minions. he was
apprised of the danger, and for a while thought of escaping, but nobler
thoughts prevailed, and he determined to meet his fate, and seal by death
a life devoted to his country. the end is well-known; on the 7th of
december he was murdered by popillius laenas, a man whom he had often
befriended, and his head and hands sent to antony, who nailed them to the
rostra, in mockery of the immortal eloquence of which that spot had so
often been the scene, and which was now for ever hushed, leaving to
posterity the bitter reflection that freedom had perished, and with her
eloquence, her legitimate and noblest child.

the works of this many-sided genius may be classed under three chief
divisions, on each of which we shall offer a few critical remarks; his
orations, his philosophical and rhetorical treatises, and his
correspondence.

cicero was above all things an orator. to be the greatest orator of rome,
the equal of demosthenes, was his supreme desire, and to it all other
studies were made subservient. poetry, history, law, philosophy, were
regarded by him only as so many qualifications without which an orator
could not be perfect. he could not conceive a great orator except as a
great man, nor a good orator except as a good man. the integrity of his
public conduct, the purity of his private life, wonderful if contrasted
with the standard of those around him, arose in no small degree from the
proud consciousness that he who was at the head of roman eloquence must
lead in all respects a higher life than other men. the cherished theory of
quintilian, that a perfect orator would be the best man that earth could
produce, is really but a restatement of cicero's firm belief. his highest
faculties, his entire nature, conspired to develop the powers of eloquence
that glowed within him; and though to us his philosophical treatises or
his letters may be more refreshing or full of richer interest than his
speeches, yet it is by these that his great fame has been mainly acquired,
and it is these which beyond comparison best display his genius.

of the eighty or thereabouts which he is known to have composed, fifty-
nine are in whole or in part preserved. they enable us to form a complete
estimate of his excellences and defects, for they belong to almost every
department of eloquence. some, as we have seen, are deliberative, others
judicial, others descriptive, others personal; and while in the two latter
classes his talents are nobly conspicuous, the first is as ill-adapted as
the second is pre-eminently suitable to his special gifts. as pleader for
an accused person, cicero cannot, we may say _could_ not, be surpassed. it
was this exercise of his talent that gave him the deepest pleasure, and
sometimes, as he says with noble pride, seemed to lift him almost above
the privileges of humanity; for to help the weak, to save the accused from
death, is a work worthy of the gods. in invective, notwithstanding his
splendid anger against catiline, antony, and piso, he does not appear at
his happiest; and the reason is not far to seek. it has often been laid to
his reproach that he corresponded and even held friendly intercourse with
men whom he holds up at another time to the execration of mankind.
catiline, antony, clodius, not to mention other less notorious criminals,
had all had friendly relations with him. and even at the very time of his
most indignant speeches, we know from his confidential correspondence that
he often meditated advances towards the men concerned, which showed at
least an indulgent attitude. the truth is, that his character was all
sympathy, he had so many points of contact with every human being, he was
so full of human feeling, that he could in a moment put himself into each
man's position and draw out whatever plea or excuse his conduct admitted.
it was not his nature to feel anger long; it evaporates almost in the
speaking; he soon returns to the kind and charitable construction which,
except for reasons of argument, he was always the foremost to assume. no
man who lived was ever more forgiving. and it is this, and not moral
blindness or indifference, which explains the glaring inconsistencies of
his relations to others. it will follow from this that he was pre-
eminently fitted for the oratory of panegyric. and beyond doubt he has
succeeded in this difficult department better than any other orator,
ancient or modern. whether he praises his country, its religion, its laws,
its citizens, its senate, or its individual magistrates, he does it with
enthusiasm, a splendour, a geniality, and an inconceivable richness of
felicitous expression which make us love the man as much as we admire his
genius. [48]

and here we do not find that apparent want of conviction that so painfully
jars on the impression of reality which is the first testimony to an
orator's worth. when he praises, he praises with all his heart. when he
raises the strain of moral indignation we can almost always beneath the
orator's enthusiasm detect the rhetorician's art. we shall have occasion
to notice in a future page the distressing loss of power which at a later
period this affectation of moral sentiment involved. in cicero it does not
intrude upon the surface, it is only remotely present in the background,
and to the romans themselves no doubt appeared an excellence rather than a
defect. nevertheless, if we compare cicero with demosthenes in this
respect, we shall at once acknowledge the decisive superiority of the
latter, not only in his never pretending to take a lofty tone when he is
simply abusing an enemy, but in his immeasurably deeper earnestness when a
question of patriotism or moral right calls out his highest powers. cicero
has always an array of common-places ready for any subject; every case
which he argues can be shown to involve such issues as the belief in a
divine providence, the loyalty to patriotic tradition, the maintenance of
the constitution, or the sanctity of family life; and on these well-worn
themes he dilates with a magnificent prodigality of pathetic ornament
which, while it lends splendour to his style, contrasts most unfavourably
with the curt, business-like, and strictly relevant arguments of
demosthenes.

for deliberative eloquence it has been already said that cicero was not
well fitted, since on great questions of state it is not so much the
orator's fire or even his arguments that move as the authority which
attaches to his person. and in this lofty source of influence cicero was
deficient. it was not by his fiery invective, or his impressive pictures
of the peril of the state, that the senate was persuaded to condemn the
catilinarian conspirators to death without a trial; it was the stern
authoritative accents of cato that settled their wavering resolution.
cicero was always applauded; men like crassus, pompey, or caesar, were
followed.

even in his own special department of judicial eloquence cicero's mind was
not able to cope with the great principles of law. such fundamental
questions as "whether law may be set aside for the purpose of saving the
state?" "how far an illegal action which has had good results is
justifiable?" questions which concern the statesman and philosopher as
much as the jurist, he meets with a superficial and merely popular
treatment. without any firm basis of opinion, either philosophical like
cato's, personal like caesar's, or traditional like that of the senate, he
was compelled to judge questions by the results which he could foresee at
the moment, and by the floating popular standard to which, as an advocate,
he had naturally turned.

but while denying to cicero the highest legal attributes, we must not
forget that the jury before whom he pleaded demanded eloquence rather than
profound knowledge. the orations to which they were accustomed were laid
out according to a fixed rhetorical plan, the plan proposed in the
treatise to herennius and in cicero's own youthful work, the _de
inventione_. there is the introduction, containing the preliminary
statement of the case, and the ethical proof; the body of the speech, the
argument, and the peroration addressing itself to the passions of the
judge. no better instance is found of this systematic treatment than the
speech for milo, [49] declared by native critics to be faultless, and of
which, for the sake of illustration, we give a succinct analysis. it must
be remembered that he has a bad case. he commences with a few introductory
remarks intended to recommend himself and conciliate his judges, dilating
on the special causes which make his address less confident than usual,
and claiming their indulgence for it. he then answers certain _a priori_
objections likely to be offered, as that no homicide deserves to live,
which is refuted by the legal permission to kill in self-defence; that
milo's act had already been condemned by the senate, which is refuted by
the fact that a majority of senators praised it; that pompey had decided
the question of law, which is refuted by his permitting a trial at all,
which he would not have done unless a legal defence could be entertained.
the objections answered, and a special compliment having been judiciously
paid to the presiding judge, he proceeds to the _expositio_, or statement
of facts. in this particular case they were by no means advantageous;
consequently, cicero shows his art by cloaking them in an involved
narration which, while apparently plausible, is in reality based on a
suppression of truth. having rapidly disposed of these, he proceeds to
sketch the line of defence with its several successive arguments. he
declares himself about to prove that so far from being the aggressor, milo
did but defend himself against a plot laid by clodius. as this was quite a
new light to the jury, their minds must be prepared for it by persuasive
grounds of probability. he first shows that clodius had strong reasons for
wishing to be rid of milo, milo on the contrary had still stronger ones
for not wishing to be rid of clodius; he next shows that clodius's life
and character had been such as to make assassination a natural act for him
to commit, while milo on the contrary had always refused to commit
violence, though he had many times had the power to do so; next, that time
and place and circumstances favoured clodius, but were altogether against
milo, some plausible objections notwithstanding, which he states with
consummate art, and then proceeds to demolish; next, that the indifference
of the accused to the crimes laid to his charge is surely incompatible
with guilt; and lastly, that even if his innocence could not be proved, as
it most certainly can, still he might take credit to himself for having
done the state a service by destroying one of its worst enemies. and then,
in the peroration that follows, he rouses the passions of the judges by a
glowing picture of clodius's guilt, balanced by an equally glowing one of
milo's virtues; he shows that providence itself had intervened to bring
the sinful career of clodius to an end, and sanctified milo by making him
its instrument, and he concludes with a brilliant avowal of love and
admiration for his client, for whose loss, if he is to be condemned,
nothing can ever console him. but the judges will not condemn him; they
will follow in the path pointed out by heaven, and restore a faithful
citizen to that country which longs for his service.--had cicero but had
the courage to deliver this speech, there can be scarcely any doubt what
the result would have been. neither senate, nor judges, nor people, ever
could resist, or ever tried to resist, the impassioned eloquence of their
great orator.

in the above speech the argumentative and ethical portions are highly
elaborated, but the descriptive and personal are, comparatively speaking,
absent. yet in nothing is cicero more conspicuous than in his clear and
lifelike descriptions. his portraits are photographic. whether he
describes the money-loving chaerea with his shaven eye-brows and head
reeking with cunning and malice; [50] or the insolent verres, lolling on a
litter with eight bearers, like an asiatic despot, stretched on a bed of
rose-leaves; [51] or vatinius, darting forward to speak, his eyes starting
from his head, his neck swollen, and his muscles rigid; [52] or the
gaulish and greek witnesses, of whom the former swagger erect across the
forum, [53] the latter chatter and gesticulate without ever looking up;
[54] we see in each case the master's powerful hand. other descriptions
are longer and more ambitious; the confusion of the catilinarian
conspirators after detection; [55] the character of catiline; [56] the
debauchery of antony in varro's villa; [57] the scourging and crucifixion
of gavius; [58] the grim old censor appius frowning on clodia his
degenerate descendent; [59] the tissue of monstrous crime which fills page
after page of the _cluentius_. [60] these are pictures for all time; they
combine the poet's eye with the stern spirit of the moralist. his power of
description is equalled by the readiness of his wit. raillery, banter,
sarcasm, jest, irony light and grave, the whole artillery of wit, is
always at his command; and though to our taste many of his jokes are
coarse, others dull, and others unfair or in bad taste, yet the romans
were never tired of extolling them. these are varied with digressions of a
graver cast: philosophical sentiments, patriotic allusions, gentle
moralisings, and rare gems of ancient legend, succeed each other in the
kaleidoscope of his shifting fancy, whose combinations may appear
irregular, but are generally bound together by chains of the most delicate
art.

his chief faults are exaggeration, vanity, and an inordinate love of
words. the former is at once a conscious rhetorical artifice, and an
unconscious effect of his vehement and excitable temperament. it probably
did not deceive his hearers any more than it deceives us. his vanity is
more deplorable; and the only palliation it admits is the fact that it is
a defect which rarely goes with a bad heart. had cicero been less vain, he
might have been more ambitious; as it was, his ridiculous self-conceit
injured no one but himself. his wordiness is of all his faults the most
seductive and the most conspicuous, and procured for him even in his
lifetime the epithet of _asiatic_. he himself was sensible that his
periods were overloaded. as has been well said, he leaves nothing to the
imagination. [61] later critics strongly censured him, and both tacitus
and quintilian think it necessary to assert his pre-eminence. his wealth
of illustration chokes the idea, as creepers choke the forest tree; both
are beautiful and bright with flowers, but both injure what they adorn.

nevertheless, if we are to judge his oratory by its effect on those for
whom it was intended, and to whom it was addressed; as the vehement,
gorgeous, impassioned utterance of an italian speaking to italians his
countrymen, whom he knew, whom he charmed, whom he mastered; we shall not
be able to refuse him a place as equal to the greatest of those whose
eloquence has swayed the destinies of the world.

we now turn to consider cicero as a philosopher, in which character he was
allowed to be the greatest teacher that rome ever had, and has descended
through the middle ages to our own time with his authority, indeed,
shaken, but his popularity scarcely diminished. we must first observe that
philosophy formed no part of his inner and real life. it was only when
inactivity in public affairs was forced upon him that he devoted himself
to its pursuit. during the agitation of the first triumvirate, he composed
the _de republica_ and _de legibus_, and during caesar's dictatorship and
the consulship of antony, he matured the great works of his old age. but
the moment he was able to return with honour to his post, he threw aside
philosophy, and devoted himself to politics, thus clearly proving that he
regarded it as a solace for leisure or a refuge from misfortune, rather
than as the serious business of life. the system that would alone be
suitable to such a character would be a sober scepticism, for scepticism
in thought corresponds exactly to vacillation in conduct. but though his
mind inclined to scepticism, he had aspirations far higher than his
intellect or his conduct could attain; in his noblest moments he half
rises to the grand stoic ideal of a self-sufficient and all-wise virtue.
but he cannot maintain himself at that height, and in general he takes the
view of the academy that all truth is but a question of more or less
probability.

to understand the philosophy of cicero, it is necessary to remember both
his own mental training, and the condition of those for whom he wrote. he
himself regarded philosophy as food for eloquence, as one of the chief
ingredients of a perfect orator. and his own mind, which by nature and
practice had been cast in the oratorical mould, naturally leaned to that
system which best admitted of presenting truth under the form of two
competing rhetorical demonstrations. his readers, too, would be most
attracted by this form of truth. he did not write for the original
thinkers, the catos, the varros, and the scaevolas; [62]
he
wrote for the great mass of intelligent men, men of the world, whom he
wished to interest in the lofty problems of which philosophy treats. he
therefore above all things strove to make philosophy eloquent. he read for
this purpose plato, aristotle, and almost all the great masters who ruled
the schools in his day; but being on a level with his age and not above
it, he naturally turned rather to the thinkers nearest his own time, whose
clearer treatment also made them most easily understood. these were
chiefly epicureans, stoics, and academicians; and from the different
_placita_ of these schools he selected such views as harmonised with his
own prepossessions, but neither chained himself down to any special
doctrine, nor endeavoured to force any doctrine of his own upon others. in
some of his more popular works, as those on political science and on moral
duties, [63] he does not employ any strictness of method; but in his more
systematic treatises he both recognises and strives to attain a regular
process of investigation. we see this in the _topica_, the _de finibus_,
and the _tusculanae disputationes_, in all of which he was greatly
assisted by the academic point of view which strove to reconcile
philosophy with the dictates of common sense. a purely speculative ideal
such as that of aristotle or plato had already ceased to be propounded
even by the greek systems; and roman philosophy carried to a much more
thorough development the practical tendency of the later greek schools. in
the _hortensius_, a work unfortunately lost, which he intended to be the
introduction to his great philosophical course, he removed the current
objections to the study, and showed philosophy to be the only comforter in
affliction and the true guide of life. the pursuit of virtue, therefore,
being the proper end of wisdom, such speculations only should be pursued
as are within the sphere of human knowledge. nevertheless he is
inconsistent with his own programme, for he extends his investigations far
beyond the limits of ethics into the loftiest problems which can exercise
the human mind. carried away by the enthusiasm which he has caught from
the great greek sages, he asserts in one place [64] that the search for
divine truth is preferable even to the duties of practical life; but that
is an isolated statement. his strong roman instinct calls him back to
recognise the paramount claims of daily life; and he is nowhere more
himself than when he declares that every one would leave philosophy to
take care of herself at the first summons of duty. [65] this subordination
of the theoretical to the practical led him to confuse in a rhetorical
presentation the several parts of philosophy, and it seeks and finds its
justification to a great extent in the endless disputes in which in every
department of thought the three chief schools were involved. physics (as
the term was understood in his day) seemed to him the most mysterious and
doubtful portion of the whole. a knowledge of the body and its properties
is difficult enough; how much more unattainable is a knowledge of such
entities as the deity and the soul! those who pronounce absolutely on
points like these involve themselves in the most inextricable
contradictions. while they declare as certainties things that obviously
differ in the general credence they meet with, they forget that certainty
does not admit of degrees, whereas probability does. how much more
reasonable therefore to regard such questions as coming within the sphere
of the probable, and varying between the highest and the lowest degrees of
probability. [66]

in his moral theory cicero shows greater decision. he is unwavering in his
repudiation of the epicurean view that virtue and pleasure are one, [67]
and generally adheres to that of the other schools, who here agree in
declaring that virtue consists in following nature. [68] but here occurs
the difficulty as to what place is to be assigned to external goods. at
one time he inclines to the lofty view of the stoic that virtue is in
itself sufficient for happiness; at another, struck by its inapplicability
to practical life, he thinks this less true than the peripatetic theory,
which takes account of external circumstances, and though considering them
as inappreciable when weighed in the balance against virtue, nevertheless
admits that within certain limits they are necessary to a complete life.
thus it appears that both in physics and morals he doubted the reality of
the great abstract conceptions of reason, and came back to the
presentations of sense as at all events the most indisputably probable.
this would lead us to infer that he rested upon the senses as the ultimate
criterion of truth. but if he adopts them as a criterion at all, he does
so with great reservations. he allows the senses indeed the power of
judging between sweet and bitter, near and distant, and the like, but he
never allows them to determine what is good and what is evil. [69] and
similarly he allows the intellect the power of judgment on genera and
species, but he does not deny that it sometimes spins out problems which
it is wholly unable to solve. [70] since therefore neither the senses nor
the intellect are capable of supplying an infallible criterion, we must
reject the stoic doctrine that there are certain sensations so forcible as
to produce an irresistible conviction of their truth. for these
philosophers ascribe the full possession of this conviction to the sage
alone, and he is not, nor can he be, one of the generality of mankind.
hence cicero, who writes for these, gives his opinion that there are
certain sensuous impressions in which from their permanence and force a
man may safely trust, though he cannot assert them to be absolutely true.
[71] this liberal and popular doctrine he is aware will be undermined by
the absolute scepticism of the new academy; [72] but he is willing to risk
this, and to put his view forward as the best possible approximation to
truth.

with these ultimate principles cicero, in his _de natura deorum_,
approaches the questions of the existence of god and of the human soul.
the bias of his own nobler nature led him to hold fast these two vital
truths, but he is fully aware that in attempting to prove them the stoics
have used arguments which are not convincing. in the tusculan disputations
[73] he acknowledges the necessity of assuming one supreme creator or
ruler of all things, endued with eternal motion in himself; and he
connects this view with the affinity which he everywhere assumes to
subsist between the human and divine spirit. with regard to the essence of
the human soul he has no clear views; but he strenuously asserts its
existence and phenomenal manifestation analogous to those of the deity,
and is disposed to ascribe to it immortality also. [74] free will he
considers to be a truth of peculiar importance, probably from the
practical consideration that on it responsibility and, therefore, morality
itself ultimately rest.

from this brief abstract it will be seen that cicero's speculative beliefs
were to a great extent determined by his moral convictions, and by his
strong persuasion of the dignity of human nature. this leads him to combat
with vigour, and satirise with merciless wit, the epicurean theory of
life; and while his strong common sense forbids him to accept the stoic
doctrine in all its defiant harshness, he strengthens the peripatetic
view, to which he on the whole leans, by introducing elements drawn from
it. the peculiar combination which he thus strives to form takes its
colour from his own character and from the terms of his native language.
the greeks declare that the beautiful (_to kalon_) is good; cicero
declares that the honourable (_honestum_) alone is good. where, therefore,
the greeks had spoken of _to kalon_, and we should speak of moral good,
cicero speaks of _honestum_, and founds precisely similar arguments upon
it. this conception implies, besides self-regarding rectitude, the praise
of others and the rewards of glory, and hence is eminently suited to the
public-spirited men for whom he wrote. to it is opposed the base
(_turpe_), that disgraceful evil which all good men would avoid. but as
his whole moral theory is built on observation as much as on reading or
reflection, he never stretches a rule too tight; he makes allowance for
overpowering circumstances, for the temper and bent of the individual.
applicable to all who are engaged in an honourable career with the
stimulus of success before them, his ethics were especially suited to the
noble families of rome to whom the approval of their conscience was indeed
a necessity of happiness, but the approval of those whom they respected
was at least equally so.

the list of his philosophical works is interesting and may well be given
here. the _paradoxa_ (written 46 b.c.), [75] explains certain paradoxes of
the stoics. the _consolatio_ (45 b.c.) was written soon after the death of
his daughter tullia, whom he tenderly loved. it is lost with the exception
of a few fragments. the same fate has befallen the _hortensius_, which
would have been an extremely interesting treatise. the _de finibus bonorum
et malorum_, in five books, was composed in 45 b.c. in the first part m.
manlius torquatus expounds the epicurean views, which cicero confutes
(books i. ii.); in the second, cato acts as champion of the stoics, who
are shown by cicero to be by no means so exclusive as they profess (books
iii. iv.); in the third and last piso explains the theories of the academy
and the lyceum. the _academica_ is divided into two editions; the first,
called _lucullus_, is still extant; the second, dedicated to varro, exists
in a considerable portion. the _tusculan disputations, timaeus_ (now
lost), and the _de natura deorum_, were all composed in the same year (45
b.c.). the latter is in the form of a dialogue between velleius the
epicurean, balbus the stoic, and cotta the academic, which is supposed to
have been held in 77 b.c. the following year were produced _laelius or de
amicitia, de divinatione_, an important essay, _de fato, cato major_ or
_de senectute, de gloria_ (now lost), _de officiis_, an excellent moral
treatise addressed to his son, and _de virtutibus_, which with the
_oeconomics and protagoras_ (translations from the greek), and the _de
auguriis_ (51 b.c.?) complete the list of his strictly philosophical
works. political science is treated by him in the _de republica_, of which
the first two books remain in a tolerably complete state, the other four
only in fragments, [76] and in the _de legibus_, of which three books only
remain. the former was commenced in the year 54 b.c. but not published
until two years later, at which time probably the latter treatise was
written, but apparently never published. while in these works the form of
dialogue is borrowed from the greek, the argument is strongly coloured by
his patriotic sympathies. he proves that the roman polity, which fuses in
a happy combination the three elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy, is the best suited for organic development and external
dominion; and he treats many constitutional and legal questions with
eloquence and insight. our loss of the complete text of these books is to
be deplored rather on account of the interesting information and numerous
allusions they contained, than from their value as an exposition of the
principles of law or government. the style is highly elaborated, and its
even flow is broken by beautiful quotations from the old poets, especially
the _annals_ of ennius.

the rhetorical works of cicero are both numerous and important. a
practical science, of which the principles were of a nature intelligible
to all, and needed only a clear exposition and the authority of personal
experience, was, of all literary subjects, the best suited to bring out
the rich qualities of cicero's mind. accordingly we find that even in his
early manhood he attempted to propound a theory of oratory in the
unfinished work _de inventione_, or _rhetorica_, as it is sometimes
called. this was compiled partly from the greek authorities, partly from
the treatise _ad herennium_, which we have noticed under the last period.
but he himself was quite conscious of its deficiencies, and alludes to it
more than once as an unripe and youthful work. the fruits of his mature
judgment were preserved in the _de oratore_, a dialogue between some of
the great orators of former days, in three books, written 55 b.c. the
chief speakers are crassus and antonius, and we infer from cicero's
identifying himself with the former's views that he regarded him on the
whole as the higher orator. the next work in the series is the invaluable
_brutus sive de claris oratoribus_, a vast mine of information on the
history of the roman bar, and the progress of oratorical excellence. the
scene is laid in the tusculan villa, where cicero meets some of his
younger friends shortly after the death of hortensius. in his criticism of
orators, past and present, he pays a touching tribute to the character and
splendid talents of his late rival and at the same time intimate friend,
and laments, what he foresaw too well, the speedy downfall of roman
eloquence. [77] all these works of his later years are tinged with a deep
sadness which lends a special charm to their graceful periods; his
political despondency drove him to seek solace in literary thought, but he
could not so far lose himself even among his beloved worthies of the past
as to throw off the cloud of gloom that softened but did not obscure his
genius. the _orator ad m. brutum_ is intended to give us his ideal of what
a perfect orator should be; its treatment is brilliant but imperfect. the
_partitiones oratoriae_, or catechism of the art of oratory, in questions
and answers, belongs to the educational sphere; and, after the example of
cato's books, is addressed to his son. the _topica_, written in 44 b.c.,
contains an account of the invention of arguments, and belongs partly to
logic, partly to rhetoric. the last work of this class is the _de optimo
genere oratorum_, which stands as a preface to the crown speeches of
demosthenes and aeschines, which cicero had translated. the chief interest
consists in the discussion it raises on the comparative merits of the
attic and asiatic styles.

in all these works there reigns throughout a magnificence of language and
a calm grandeur of tone well befitting the literary representative of the
"assembly of kings." nowhere perhaps in all literature can be found
compositions in which so many sources of permanent attraction meet;
dignity, sweetness, an inexpressible and majestic eloquence, drawing the
reader along until he seems lost in a sea of grand language and lofty
thoughts, and at the same time a sympathetic human feeling, a genial
desire to persuade, a patient perseverance in illustration, an inimitable
clearness of expression; admirable qualities, whose rich harmonious
combination is perhaps incompatible with the profoundest philosophic
wisdom, but which have raised cicero to take the lead among those great
popular teachers who have expressed, and by expressing furthered, the
growing enlightenment of mankind.

the letters of cicero are among the most interesting remains of antiquity.
the ancients paid more attention to letter-writing than we do; they
thought their friends as worthy as the public of well-weighed expressions
and a careful style. but no other writer who has come down to us can be
compared with cicero, for the grace, the naturalness, and the unreserve of
his communications. seneca and pliny, walpole and pope, wrote for the
world, not for their correspondents. among the moderns mme. de sevigne
approaches most nearly to the excellences of cicero.

in the days when newspapers were unknown a roman provincial governor
depended for information solely upon private letters. it was of the utmost
importance that he should hear from the capital and be able to convey his
own messages to it. yet, unless he was able to maintain couriers of his
own, it was almost impossible to send or receive news. in such cases he
had to depend on the fidelity of chance messengers, a precarious ground of
confidence. we find that all the great nobles retained in their service
one or more of these _tabellarii_. cicero was often disquieted by the
thought that his letters might have miscarried; at times he dared not
write at all, so great was the risk of accident or foul play.

letters were sometimes written on parchment with a reed [78] dipped in
ink, [79] but far more frequently on waxen tablets with the _stilus_. wax
was preferred to other material, as admitting a swifter hand and an easier
erasure. when cicero wrote, his ideas came so fast that his handwriting
became illegible. his brother more than once complains of this defect. we
hear of his writing three letters to atticus in one day. familiar missives
like these were penned at any spare moment during the day's business, at
the senate during a dull speech, at the forum when witnesses were being
examined, at the bath, or oftener still between the courses at dinner.
thrown off in a moment while the impression that dictated them was still
fresh, they bear witness to every changing mood, and lay bare the inmost
soul of the writer. but, as a rule, few romans were at the pains to write
their letters with their own hand. they delegated this mechanical process
to slaves. [80] it seems strange that nothing similar to our running hand
should have been invented among them. perhaps it was owing to the
abundance of these humble aids to labour. from the constant use of
amanuenses it often resulted that no direct evidence of authorship existed
beyond the appended seal. when antony read before the senate a private
letter from cicero, the orator replied, "what madness it is to bring
forward as a witness against me a letter of which i might with perfect
impunity deny the genuineness." the seal, stamped with the signet-ring,
was of wax, and laid over the fastening of the thread which bound the
tablets together. hence the many ingenious devices for obliterating,
softening, or imitating the impression, which are so often alluded to by
orators and satirists.

many of the more important letters, such as cicero's to lentulus, that of
quintus to cicero, &c. were political pamphlets, which, after they had
done their work, were often published, and met with a ready sale. it is
impossible to ascertain approximately the amount of copying that went on
in rome, but it was probably far less than is generally supposed. there is
nothing so cramping to the inventive faculty as the existence of slave
labour. how else can we account for the absence of any machinery for
multiplying copies of documents, an inconvenience which, in the case of
the _acta diurna_, as well as of important letters, must have been keenly
felt? even shorthand and cipher, though known, were rarely practised.
caesar, [81] however, used them; but in many points he was beyond his age.
in america, where labour is refractory, mechanical substitutes for it are
daily being invented. a calculating machine, and a writing machine, which
not only multiplies but forms the original copy, are inventions so simple
as to indicate that it was want of enterprise rather than of ingenuity
which, made the romans content with such an imperfect apparatus.

to write a letter well one must have the desire to please. this cicero
possessed to an almost feminine extent. he thirsted for the approbation of
the good, and when he could not get that he put up with the applause of
the many. and thus his letters are full of that heartiness and vigour
which comes from the determination to do everything he tries to do well.
they have besides the most perfect and unmistakable reality. every foible
is confessed; every passing thought, even such as one would rather not
confess even to oneself, is revealed and recorded to his friend. it is
from these letters to a great extent that cicero has been so severely
judged. he stands, say his critics, self-condemned. this is true; but it
is equally true that the ingenuity which pieces together a mosaic out of
these scattered fragments of evidence, and labels it _the character of
cicero_, is altogether misapplied. one man may reveal everything; another
may reveal nothing; our opinion in either case must be based on the
inferences of common sense and experience of the world, for neither of
such persons is a witness to be trusted. weakness and inconsistency are
visible indeed in all cicero's letters; but who can imagine caesar or
crassus writing such letters at all? the perfect unreserve which gives
them their charm and their value for us is also the highest possible
testimony to the uprightness of their author.

the collection comprises a great variety of subjects and a considerable
number of correspondents. the most important are those to atticus, which
were already published in the time of nepos. other large volumes existed,
of which only one, that entitled _ad familiares_ has come down entire to
us. like the volume to atticus, it consists of sixteen books, extending
from the year after his consulship until that of his death. the collection
was made by tiro, cicero's freedman, after his death, and was perhaps the
earliest of the series. a small collection of letters to his brother (_ad
quintum fratrem_), in six books, still remains, and a correspondence
between cicero and brutus in two books. the former were written between
the years 60 and 54 b.c. the latter in the period subsequent to the death
of caesar. the letters to atticus give us information on all sorts of
topics, political, pecuniary, personal, literary. everything that occupied
cicero's mind is spoken of with freedom, for atticus, though cold and
prudent, had the rare gift of drawing others out. this quality, as well as
his prudence, is attested by cornelius nepos; and we observe that when he
advised cicero his counsel was almost always wise and right. he sustained
him in his adversity, when heart-broken and helpless he contemplated, but
lacked courage to commit suicide; and he sympathised with his success, as
well as aided him in a more tangible sense with the resources of his vast
fortune. among the many things discussed in the letters we are struck by
the total absence of the philosophical and religious questions which in
other places he describes as his greatest delight. religion, as we
understand it, had no place in his heart. if we did not possess the
letters, if we judged only by his dialogues and his orations, we should
have imagined him deeply interested in all that concerned the national
faith; but we see that in his genuine moments he never gave it a thought.
politics, letters, art, his own fame, and the success of his party, such
are the points on which he loves to dwell. but he is also most
communicative on domestic matters, and shows the tenderest family feeling.
to his wife, until the unhappy period of his divorce, to his brother, to
his unworthy son, but above all to his daughter, his beloved _tulliola_,
he pours forth, all the warmth of a deep affection; and even his freedman
tiro comes in for a share of kindly banter which shows the friendly
footing on which the great man and his dependant stood. cicero was of all
men the most humane. while accepting slavery as an institution of his
ancestors, he did all he could to make its burden lighter; he conversed
with his slaves, assisted them, mourned their death, and, in a word,
treated them as human beings. we learn from the letters that in this
matter, and in another of equal importance, the gladiatorial shows, cicero
was far ahead of the feeling of his time. when he listened to his heart,
it always led him right. and if it led him above all things to repose
complete confidence on his one intimate friend, that only draws us to him
the more; he felt like bacon that a crowd is not company, and faces are
but a gallery of pictures, and talk is but a tinkling cymbal, where there
is no love.

it only remains very shortly to mention his poetry. he himself knew that
he had not the poetic afflatus, but his immense facility of style which
made it as easy for him to write in verse as in prose, and his desire to
rival the greeks in every department of composition, tempted him to essay
his wings in various flights of song. we have mentioned his poem on marius
and those on his consulship and times, which pleased himself best and drew
forth from others the greatest ridicule. he wrote also versions from the
iliad, of which he quotes several in various works; heroic poems called
_halcyone_ and _cimon_, an elegy called _tamelastis_, [82] a _libellus
iocularis_, about which we have no certain information, and various
epigrams to tiro, caninius, and others. it will he necessary to refer to
some of these works on a future page. we shall therefore pass them by
here, and conclude the chapter with a short notice of the principal
orators who were younger contemporaries of cicero.

coelius, with whom cicero was often brought into relations, was a quick,
polished, and sometimes lofty speaker; [83] calidius a delicate and
harmonious one. on one occasion when calidius was accusing a man of
conspiring against his life, he pleaded with such smoothness and languor,
that cicero, who was for the defence, at once gained his cause by the
_argumentum ad hominem. tu istuc m. calidi nisi fingeres sic ageres?
praesertim cum ista eloquentia alienorum hominum pericula defendere
acerrime soleas, tuum negligeres? ubi dolor? ubi ardor animi, qui etiam ex
infantium ingeniis elicere voces et querelas solet? nulla perturbatio
animi, nulla corporis: frons non percussa, non femur; pedis, quod minimum
est, nulla supplosio. itaque tantum abfuit ut imflammares animos nostros,
somnum isto loco vix tenebamus_. [84] curio he describes as bold and
flowing; calvus from affectation of attic purity, as cold, cautious, and
jejune. his dry, sententious style, to which brutus also inclined, was a
reaction from the splendour of cicero, a splendour which men like these
could never hope to reach; and perhaps it was better that they should
reject all ornament rather than misapply it. it seems that after cicero
oratory had lost the fountain of its life; he responded so perfectly to
the exigencies of the popular taste and the possibilities of the time,
that after him no new theory of eloquence could be produced, while to
improve upon his practice was evidently hopeless. thus the reaction that
comes after literary perfection conspired with the dawn of freedom to make
cicero the last as well as the greatest of those who deserved the name of
orator; and we acknowledge the justice of the poet's epigram, [85]
questioned as it was at the time.


appendix.

_poetry of cicero._

the poems of cicero are of considerable importance to the student of latin
versification. his great facility and formal polish made him successful in
producing a much more finished and harmonious cadence than had before been
attained. coming between ennius and lucretius, and evidently studied by
the latter, he is an important link in metrical development. we propose in
this note merely to give some examples of his versification that the
student may judge for himself, and compare them with those of lucretius,
catullus, and virgil. they are quoted from the edition of orelli (vol. iv.
p. 0112 _sqq._).

from the _marius_ (cic. de legg. i. i. s 2):

  "hic lovis altisoni subito pinnata satelles
  arboris e trunco serpentis saucia morsu
  subrigit, ipsa feris transfigens unguibus, anguem
  semianimum et varia graviter cervice micantem,
  quem se intorquentem lanians rostroque cruentans,
  iam saltata animos, iam duros ulta dolores,
  abiecit ceflantem et laceratum adfligit in unda,
  seque obitu a solis nitidos convertit ad ortus.
  hanc ubi praepetibus pennis lapsuque vo antem
  conspexit marius, divini miminis augur,
  faustaque signa suae laudis reditusque notavit,
  partibus intonuit caeli pater ipse sinistris.
  sic aquilae clarum firmavit iuppiter omen."

praises of himself, from the poem on his consulship (div. i. ii. s 17
_sqq._):

  "haec tardata diu species multumque morata
  consulet tandem celsa est in sede locata,
  atque una tixi ac signati temporis hora,
  iuppiter excelsa clarabat sceptra columna;
  et clades patriae flamma ferroque parata
  vocibus allobrogum patribus populoque patebat.
  rite igitur veteres quorum monumenta tenetis,
  qui populos urbisque modo ac virtute regebant,
  ritectiam vestri quorum pietasque fidesque
  praestitit ac longe vicit sapientia cunctos
  praecipue coluere vigenti numine divos.
  haec adeo penitus cura videri sagaci
  otia qui studiis laeti tenuere decoris,
  inque academia umbrifera nitidoque lyceo
  fuderunt claras fecundi pectoris artis:
  e quibus ereptum primo iam a flore in ventae,
  te patria in media virtuttum mole locavit.
  tu tamen auxiferas curas requiete relaxans
  quod patriae vacat id studiis nobisque dedisti."

we append some verses by quintus cicero, who the orator declared would
make a better poet than himself. they are on the twelve constellations,
a well-worn but apparently attractive  subject:

  "flumina verna cient obscuro lumine pisces,
  curriculumque aries aequat noctisque dieque,
  cornua quem comunt florum praenuntia tauri,
  aridaque aestatis gemini primordia pandunt,
  longaque iam minuit praeclarus lumina cancer,
  languiticusque leo proflat ferus ore calores.
  post modicum quatiens virgo fugat orta vaporem.
  autumnni reserat porfas aequatque diurna
  tempora nocturnis disperse sidere libra,
  et fetos ramos denudat flamma nepai.
  pigra sagittipotens iaculatur frigora terris.
  bruma gelu glacians iubare spirat capricorni:
  quam sequitur nebulas rorans liquor altus aquari:
  tanta supra circaque vigent ubi flumina. mundi
  at dextra laevaque cict rota fulgida solis
  mobile curriculum, et lunae simulacra feruntur.
  squama sub aeterno conspectu torta draconis
  eminet: hanc inter fulgentem sidera septem
  magna quatit stellans, quam serrans serus in alia
  conditur oceani ripa cum luce bootes."

this is poor stuff; two epigrams are more interesting:

  i.

  "crede ratem ventis, animum ne crede puellis:
  namque est feminea tutior unda fide."

  ii.

  "femina nulla bona est, et, si bona contigit ulla,
  nescio quo fato res mala facta bona."

we observe the entire lack of inspiration, combined with considerable
smoothness, but both, in a feebler degree, which are characteristic of his
brother's poems.




chapter iii.

historical and biographical composition--caesar--nepos--sallust.


it is well known that cicero felt strongly tempted to write a history of
rome. considering the stirring events among which he lived, the grandeur
of rome's past, and the exhaustless literary resources which he himself
possessed, we are not surprised either at his conceiving the idea or at
his friends encouraging it. nevertheless it is fortunate for his literary
fame that he abandoned the proposal, [1] for he would have failed in
history almost more signally than he did in poetry. his mind was not
adapted for the kind of research required, nor his judgment for weighing
historic evidence. when lucceius announced his intention of writing a
history which should include the catilinarian conspiracy, cicero did not
scruple to beg him to enlarge a little on the truth. "you must grant
something to our friendship; let me pray you to delineate my exploits in a
way that shall reflect the greatest possible glory on myself." [2] a lax
conception of historical responsibility, which is not peculiar to cicero.
he is but an exaggerated type of his nation in this respect. no roman
author, unless it be tacitus, has been able fully to grasp the extreme
complexity as well as difficulty of the historian's task. even the sage
quintilian maintains the popular misconception when he says, "history is
closely akin to poetry, and is written for purposes of narration not of
proof; being composed with the motive of transmitting our fame to
posterity, it avoids the dulness of continuous narrative by the use of
rarer words and freer periphrases." [3] we may conclude that this
criticism is based on a careful study of the greatest recognised models.
this false opinion arose no doubt from the narrowness of view which
persisted in regarding all kinds of literature as merely exercises in
_style_. for instance accuracy of statements was not regarded as the goal
and object of the writer's labours, but rather as a useful means of
obtaining _clearness of arrangement_; abundant information helped towards
_condensation_; original observation towards _vivacity_; personal
experience of the events towards _pathos_ or _eloquence_.

so unfortunately prevalent was this view that a writer was not called a
historian unless he had considerable pretensions to style. thus, men who
could write, and had written, in an informal way, excellent historical
accounts, were not studied by their countrymen as historians. their
writings were relegated to the limbo of antiquarian remains. the habit of
writing notes of their campaigns, memoranda of their public conduct,
copies of their speeches, &c. had for some time been usual among the abler
or more ambitious nobles. often these were kept by them, laid by for
future elaboration: oftener still they were published, or sent in the form
of letters to the author's friends. the letters of cicero and his numerous
correspondents present such a series of raw material for history; and in
reading any of the antiquarian writers of rome we are struck by the large
number of monographs, essays, pamphlets, rough notes, commentaries, and
the like, attributed to public men, to which they had access.

it is quite clear that for many years these documents had existed, and
equally clear that, unless their author was celebrated or their style
elegant, the majority of readers entirely neglected them. nevertheless
they formed a rich material for the diligent and capable historian. in
using them, however, we could not expect him to show the same critical
acumen, the same impartiality, as a modern writer trained in scientific
criticism and the broad culture of international ideas; to expect this
would be to expect an impossibility. to look at events from a national
instead of a party point of view was hard; to look at them from a human
point of view, as polybius had done, was still harder. thus we cannot
expect from republican rome any historical work of the same scope and
depth as those of herodotus and thucydides; neither the dramatic genius of
the one nor the philosophic insight of the other was to be gained there.
all we can look for is a clear comprehensive narrative, without flagrant
misrepresentation, of some of the leading episodes, and such we
fortunately possess in the memoirs of caesar and the biographical essays
of sallust.

the immediate object of the commentaries of julius caesar (100-44 b.c.),
was no doubt to furnish the senate with an authentic military report on
the gallic and civil wars. but they had also an ulterior purpose. they
aspired to justify their author in the eyes of rome and of posterity in
his attitude of hostility to the constitution.

pompey was perhaps quite as desirous of supreme power as caesar, and was
equally ready to make all patriotic motives subordinate to self-interest.
nevertheless he gained, by his connexion with the senate, the reputation
of defender of the constitution, and thought fit to appropriate the
language of patriotism. caesar, in his _commentaries_--which, though both
unfinished and, historically speaking, unconnected with one another,
reveal the deeper connexion of successive products of the same creative
policy--labours throughout to show that he acted in accordance with the
forms of the constitution and for the general good of rome. this he does
not as a rule attempt to prove by argument. occasionally he does so, as
when any serious accusation was brought against the legitimacy of his
acts; and these are among the most important and interesting chapters in
his work. [4] but his habitual method of exculpating himself is by his
persuasive moderation of statement, and his masterly collocation of
events. in reading the narrative of the civil war it is hard to resist the
conviction that he was unfairly treated. without any terms of reprobation,
with scarcely any harsh language, with merely that wondrous skill in
manipulating the series of facts which genius possesses, he has made his
readers, even against their prepossession, disapprove of pompey's attitude
and condemn the bitter hostility of the senate. so, too, in the report of
the gallic war, where diplomatic caution was less required, the same
apparent candour, the same perfect statement of his case, appears. in
every instance of aggressive and ambitious war, there is some equitable
proposal refused, some act of injustice not acknowledged, some
infringement of the dignity of the roman people committed, which makes it
seem only natural that caesar should exact reprisals by the sword. on two
or three occasions he betrays how little regard he had for good faith when
barbarians were in consideration, and how completely absent was that
generous clemency in the case of a vanquished foreign prince, which when
exercised towards his own countrymen procured him such enviable renown.
[5] his treacherous conduct towards the usipetes and tenchteri, which he
relates with perfect _sang froid_, [6] is such as to shock us beyond
description; his brutal vengeance upon the atuatici and veneti, [7] all
whose leading men he murdered, and sold the rest, to the number of 53,000,
by auction; his cruel detention of the noble vercingetorix, who, after
acting like an honourable foe in the field, voluntarily gave himself up to
appease the conqueror's wrath; [8] these are blots in caesar's scutcheon,
which, if they do not place him below the recognised standard of action of
the time, prevent him from being placed in any way above it. the theory
that good faith is unnecessary with an uncivilised foe, is but the other
side of the doctrine that it is merely a thing of expediency in the case
of a civilised one. and neither rome herself, nor many of her greatest
generals, can free themselves from the grievous stain of perfidious
dealing with those whom they found themselves powerful enough so to treat.

but if we can neither approve the want of principle, nor accept the _ex
parte_ statements which are embodied in caesar's _commentaries_, we can
admire to the utmost the incredible and almost superhuman activity which,
more than any other quality, enabled him to overcome his enemies. this is
evidently the means on which he himself most relied. the prominence he has
given to it in his writings makes it almost equivalent to a precept. the
burden of his achievements is the continual repetition of _quam celerrime
contendendum ratus,--maximis citissimisque itineribus profectus_,--and
other phrases describing the rapidity of his movements. by this he so
terrified the pompeians that, hearing he was _en route_ for rome, they
fled in such dismay as not even to take the money they had amassed for the
war, but to leave it a prey to caesar. and by the want of this, as he
sarcastically observes, the pompeians lost their only chance of crushing
him, when, driven from dyrrhachium, with his army seriously crippled and
provisions almost exhausted, he must have succumbed to the numerous and
well-fed forces opposed to him. [9] he himself would never have committed
such a mistake. the after-work of his victories was frequently more
decisive than the victories themselves. he always pursued his enemies into
their camp, by storming which he not only broke their spirit, but made it
difficult for them to retain their unity of action. no man ever knew so
well the truth of the adage "nothing succeeds like success;" and his
_commentaries_ from first to last are instinct with a triumphant
consciousness of his knowledge and of his having invariably acted upon it.

a feature which strikes every reader of caesar is the admiration and
respect he has for his soldiers. though unsparing of their lives when
occasion demanded, he never speaks of them as "food for powder." once,
when his men clamoured for battle, but he thought he could gain his point
without shedding blood, he refused to fight, though the discontent became
alarming: "cur, etiam secundo praelio, aliquas ex suis amitteret? cur
vulnerari pateretur optime meritos de se milites? cur denique fortunam
periclitaretur, praesertim cum non minus esset imperatoris consilio
superare quam gladio?" this consideration for the lives of his soldiers,
when the storm was over, won him gratitude; and it was no single instance.
everywhere they are mentioned with high praise, and no small portion of
the victory is ascribed to them. stories of individual valour are
inserted, and several centurions singled out for special commendation.
caesar lingers with delight over the exploits of his tenth legion.
officers and men are all fondly remembered. the heroic conduct of pulfio
and varenus, who challenge each other to a display of valour, and by each
saving the other's life are reconciled to a friendly instead of a hostile
rivalry; [10] the intrepidity of the veterans at lissus, whose self-
reliant bravery calls forth one of the finest descriptions in the whole
book; [11] and the loyal devotion of all when he announces his critical
position, and asks if they will stand by him, [12] are related with
glowing pride. numerous other merely incidental notices, scattered through
both works, confirm the pleasing impression that commander and commanded
had full confidence in each other; and he relates [13] with pardonable
exultation the speaking fact that among all the hardships they endured
(hardships so terrible that pompey, seeing the roots on which they
subsisted, declared he had beasts to fight with and not men) not a soldier
except labienus and two gaulish officers ever deserted his cause, though
thousands came over to him from the opposite side. it is the greatest
proof of his power over men, and thereby, of his military capacity, that
perhaps it is possible to show.

besides their clear description of military manoeuvres, of engineering,
bridge-making, and all kinds of operations, in which they may be compared
with the despatches of the great generals of modern times, caesar's
_commentaries_ contain much useful information regarding the countries he
visited. there is a wonderful freshness and versatility about his mind.
while primarily considering a country, as he was forced to do, from its
strategical features, or its capacity for furnishing contingents or
tribute, he was nevertheless keenly alive to all objects of interest,
whether in nature or in human customs. the inquiring curiosity with which
lucan upbraids him during his visit to egypt, if it were not on that
occasion assumed, as some think, to hide his real projects, was one of the
chief characteristics of his mind. as soon as he thought gaul was quiet he
hurried to illyria, [14] animated by the desire to see those nations, and
to observe their customs for himself. his journey into britain, though by
suetonius attributed to avarice, which had been kindled by the report of
enormous pearls of fine quality to be found on our coasts, is by himself
attributed to his desire to see so strange a country, and to be the first
to conquer it. [15] his account of our island, though imperfect, is
extremely interesting. he mentions many of our products. the existence of
lead and iron ore was known to him; he does not allude to tin, but its
occurrence can hardly have been unknown to him. he remarks that the beech
and pine do not grow in the south of england, which is probably an
inaccuracy; [16] and he falls into the mistake of supposing that the north
of scotland enjoys in winter a period of thirty days total darkness. his
account of gaul, and, to a certain extent, of germany, is more explicit.
he gives a fine description of the druids and their mysterious religion,
noticing in particular the firm belief in the immortality of the soul,
which begot indifference to death, and was a great incentive to bravery.
[17] the effects of this belief are dwelt on by lucan in one of his most
effective passages, [18] which is greatly borrowed from caesar. their
knowledge of letters, and their jealous restriction of it to themselves
and express prohibition of any written literature, he attributes partly to
their desire to keep the people ignorant, the common feeling of a powerful
priesthood, and partly to a conviction that writing injures the memory,
which among men of action should be kept in constant exercise. his
acquaintance with german civilization is more superficial, and shows that
incapacity for scientific criticism which was common to all antiquity.
[19] his testimony to the chastity of the german race, confirmed
afterwards by tacitus, is interesting as showing one of the causes which
have contributed to its greatness. he relates, with apparent belief, the
existence of several extraordinary quadrupeds in the vast hercynian
forest, such as the unicorn of heraldry, which here first appears; the
elk, which has no joints to its legs, and cannot lie down, whose bulk he
depreciates as much as he exaggerates that of the urus or wild bull, which
he describes as hardly inferior to the elephant in size. to have slain one
of these gigantic animals, and carried off its horns as a trophy, was
almost as great a glory as the possession of the grizzly bear's claws
among the indians of the rocky mountains. some of his remarks on the
temper of the gauls might be applied almost without change to their modern
representatives. the french _elan_ is done ample justice to, as well as
the instability and self-esteem of that great people. "_ut ad bella
suscipienda gallorum alacer et promptus est animus, sic mollis ac minime
resistens ad calamitates perferendas mens eorum est_." [20] and again,
"_quod sunt in capessendis consiliis mobiles et novis plerumque rebus
student_." [21] he notices the tall stature of both gauls and germans,
which was at first the cause of some terror to his soldiers, and some
contemptuousness on their part. [22] "_plerisque hominibus gallis prae
magnitudine corporum suorum brevitas nostra contemptui est_."

caesar himself was of commanding presence, great bodily endurance, and
heroic personal daring. these were qualities which his enemies knew how to
respect. on one occasion, when his legions were blockaded in germany, he
penetrated at night to his camp disguised as a gaul; and in more than one
battle he turned the fortune of the day by his extraordinary personal
courage, fighting on foot before his wavering troops, or snatching the
standard from the centurion's timid grasp. he took the greatest pains to
collect accurate information, and frequently he tells us who his
informants were. [23] where there was no reason for the suppression or
misrepresentation of truth, caesar's statements may be implicitly relied
on. no man knew human nature better, or how to decide between conflicting
assertions. he rarely indulges in conjecture, but in investigating the
motives of his adversaries he is penetrating and unmerciful. at the
commencement of the treatise on the civil war he gives his opinion as to
the considerations that weighed with lentulus, cato, scipio, and pompey;
and it is characteristic of the man that of all he deals most hardly with
cato, whose pretensions annoyed him, and in whose virtue he did not
believe. to the bravest of his gallic enemies he is not unjust. the nervii
in particular, by their courage and self-devotion, excite his warm
admiration, [24] and while he felt it necessary to exterminate them, they
seem to have been among the very few that moved his pity.

as to the style of these two great works, no better criticism can be given
than that of cicero in the _brutus_; [25] "they are worthy of all praise:
they are unadorned, straightforward, and elegant, every ornament being
stripped off as it were a garment. while he desired to give others the
material out of which to create a history; he may perhaps have done a
kindness to conceited writers who wish to trick them out with meretricious
graces; [26] but he has deterred all men of sound taste from touching
them. for in history a pure and brilliant conciseness of style is the
highest attainable beauty." condensed as they are, and often almost bald,
they have that matchless clearness which marks the mind that is master of
its entire subject. we have only to compare them with the excellent but
immeasurably inferior commentaries of hirtius to estimate their value in
this respect. precision, arrangement, method, are qualities that never
leave them from beginning to end. it is much to be regretted that they are
so imperfect and that the text is not in a better state. in the _civil
war_ particularly, gaps frequently occur, and both the beginning and the
end are lost. they were written during the campaign, though no doubt cast
into their present form in the intervals of winter leisure. hirtius, who,
at caesar's request, appended an eighth book to the _gallic war_, tells us
in a letter to balbus, how rapidly he wrote. "i wish that those who will
read my book could know how unwillingly i took it in hand, that i might
acquit myself of folly and arrogance in completing what caesar had begun.
for all agree; that the elegance of these commentaries surpasses the most
laborious efforts of other writers. they were edited to prevent historians
being ignorant of matters of such high importance. but so highly are they
approved by the universal verdict that the power of amplifying them has
been rather taken away than bestowed by their publication. [27] and yet i
have a right to marvel at this even more than others. for while others
know how faultlessly they are written, i know with what ease and rapidity
he dashed them off. for caesar, besides the highest conceivable literary
gift, possessed the most perfect skill in explaining his designs." this
testimony of his most intimate friend is confirmed by a careful perusal of
the works, the elaboration of which, though very great, consists, not in
the execution of details, but in the carefully meditated design. the
_commentaries_ have always been a favourite book with soldiers as with
scholars. their latinity is not more pure than their tactics are
instructive. nor are the loftier graces of composition wanting. the
speeches of curio rise into eloquence. [28] petreius's despair at the
impending desertion of his army [29] is powerfully drawn, and the
contrast, brief but effective, between the pompeians' luxury and his own
army's want of common necessaries, assumes all the grandeur of a moral
warning. [30]

the example of their general and their own devotion induced other
distinguished men to complete his work. a. hirtius (consul 43 b.c.), who
served with him in the gallic and civil wars, as we have seen, added at
his request an eighth book to the history of the former; and in the
judgment of the best critics the _alexandrine war_ is also by his hand.
from these two treatises, which are written in careful imitation of
caesar's manner, we form a high conception of the literary standard among
men of education. for hirtius, though a good soldier and an efficient
consul, was a literary man only by accident. it was caesar who ordered him
to write, first a reply to cicero's panegyric on cato, and then the gallic
commentary. nevertheless, his two books show no inferiority in taste or
diction to those of his illustrious chief. they of course lack his genius;
but there is the same purity of style, the same perfect moderation of
language.

nothing is more striking than the admirable taste of the highest
conversational language at rome in the seventh century of the republic.
not only hirtius, but matius, balbus, sulpicius, brutus, cassius and other
correspondents of cicero, write to him in a dialect as pure as his own. it
is true they have not his grace, his inimitable freedom and copiousness.
most of them are somewhat laboured, and give us the impression of having
acquired with difficulty the control of their inflexible material. but the
intimate study of the noble language in which they wrote compels us to
admit that it was fully equal to the clear exposition of the severest
thought and the most subtle diplomatic reasoning. but its prime was
already passing. even men of the noblest family could not without long
discipline attain the lofty standard of the best conversational
requirements. sextus pompeius is said to have been _sermone barbarus_.
[31] on this niebuhr well remarks: "it is remarkable to see how at that
time men who did not receive a thorough education neglected their mother-
tongue, and spoke a corrupt form of it. the _urbanitas_, or perfection of
the language, easily degenerated unless it were kept up by careful study.
cicero [32] speaks of the _sermo urbanus_ in the time of laelius, and
observes that the ladies of that age spoke exquisitely. but in caesar's
time it had begun to decay." caesar, in one of his writings, tells his
reader to shun like a rock every unusual form of speech. [33] and this
admirable counsel he has himself generally followed--but few
provincialisms or archaisms can be detected in his pages. [34] in respect
of style he stands far at the head of all the latin historians. the
authorship of the _african war_ is doubtful; it seems best, with niebuhr,
to assign it to oppius. the _spanish war_ is obviously written by a person
of a different sort. it may either be, as niebuhr thinks, the work of a
centurion or military tribune in the common rank of life, or, as we
incline to think, of a provincial, perhaps a spaniard, who was well read
in the older literature of rome, but could not seize the complex and
delicate idiom of the _beau monde_ of his day. with vulgarisms like _bene
magni, in opere distenti_, [35] and inaccuracies like _ad ignoscendum_ for
_ad se excusandum_, [36] _quam opimam_ for _quam optimam_, [37] he
combines quotations from ennius, _e.g. hic pes pede premitur, armis
teruntur arma_, [38] and rhetorical constructions, _e.g. alteri alteris
non solum mortem morti exaggerabant, sed tumulos tumulis exaequabant_.
[39] he quotes the words of caesar in a form of which we can hardly
believe the dictator to have been guilty: "_caesar gives conditions: he
never receives them_:" [40] and again, "_i am caesar: i keep my faith_."
[41] points like these, to which we may add his fondness for dwelling on
horrid details [42] (always omitted by caesar), and for showy
descriptions, as that of the single combat between turpio and niger, [43]
seem to mark him out as in mind if not in race a spaniard. these are the
very features we find recurring in lucan and seneca, which, joined to
undoubted talent, brought a most pernicious element into the latin style.

to us caesar's literary power is shown in the sphere of history. but to
his contemporaries he was even more distinguished in other fields. as an
orator he was second, and only second, to cicero. [44] his vigorous sense,
close argument, brilliant wit, and perfect command of language, made him,
from his first appearance as accuser of dolabella at the age of 22, one of
the foremost orators of rome. and he possessed also, though he kept in
check, that greatest weapon of eloquence, the power to stir the passions.
but with him eloquence was a means, not an end. he spoke to gain his
point, not to acquire fame; and thus thought less of enriching than of
enforcing his arguments. one ornament of speech, however, he pursued with
the greatest zeal, namely, good taste and refinement; [45] and in this,
according to cicero, he stood above all his rivals. unhappily, not a
single speech remains; only a few characteristics fragments, from which we
can but feel the more how much we have lost. [46]

besides speeches, which were part of his public life, he showed a deep
interest in science. he wrote a treatise on grammar, _de analogia_, for
which he found time in the midst of one of his busiest campaigns [47] and
dedicated to cicero, [48] much to the orator's delight. in the dedication
occur these generous words, "if many by study and practice have laboured
to express their thoughts in noble language, of which art i consider you
to be almost the author and originator, it is our duty to regard you as
one who has well deserved of the name and dignity of the roman people."
the treatise was intended as an introduction to philosophy and eloquence,
and was itself founded on philosophical principles; [49] and beyond doubt
it brought to bear on the subject that luminous arrangement which was
inseparable from caesar's mind. some of his conclusions are curious; he
lays down that the genitive of _dies_ is _die_; [50] the genitive plural
of _panis, pars; panum, partum_; [51] the accusative of _turbo, turbonem_;
[52] the perfect of _mordeo_ and the like, _memordi_ not _momordi_; [53]
the genitive of _pompeius, pompeiii_. [54] the forms _maximus, optimus,
municipium_, [55] &c. which he introduced, seem to have been accepted on
his authority, and to have established themselves finally in the language.

as chief pontifex he interested himself with a digest of the _auspices_,
which he carried as far as sixteen books. [56] the _auguralia_, which are
mentioned by priscian, are perhaps a second part of the same treatise. he
also wrote an essay on _divination_, like that of cicero. in this he
probably disclosed his real opinions, which we know from other sources
were those of the extremest scepticism. there seemed no incongruity in a
man who disbelieved the popular religion holding the sacred office of
pontifex. the persuasion that religion was merely a department of the
civil order was considered, even by cicero, to absolve men from any
conscientious allegiance to it. after his elevation to the perpetual
dictatorship he turned his mind to astronomy, owing to the necessities of
the calendar; and composed, or at least published, several books which
were thought by no means unscientific, and are frequently quoted. [57] of
his poems we shall speak in another place. the only remaining works are
his two pamphlets against cato, to which juvenal refers: [58]

 "maiorem quam sunt duo caesaris anticatones."

these were intended as a reply to cicero's laudatory essay, but though
written with the greatest ability, were deeply prejudiced and did not
carry the people with them. [59] the witty or proverbial sayings of caesar
were collected either during his life, or after his death, and formed an
interesting collection. some of them attest his pride, as "_my word is
law_;" [60] "_i am not king, but caesar_;" [61] others his clemency, as,
"_spare the citizens_;" [62] others his greatness of soul, as, "_caesar's
wife must be above suspicion_." [63]

several of his letters are preserved; they are in admirable taste, but do
not present any special points for criticism. with caesar ends the
collection of genuine letter-writers, who wrote in conversational style,
without reference to publicity. in after times we have indeed numerous so-
called letters, but they are no longer the same class of composition as
these, nor have any recent letters the vigour, grace, and freedom of those
of cicero and caesar.

a friend of many great men, and especially of atticus, cornelius nepos
(74?-24 b.c.) owes his fame to the kindness of fortune more than to his
own achievements. had we possessed only the account of him given by his
friends, we should have bewailed the loss of a learned and eloquent
author. [64] fortunately we have the means of judging of his talent by a
short fragment of his work _on illustrious men_, which, though it
relegates him to the second rank in intellect, does credit to his
character and heart. [65] it consists of the lives of several greek
generals and statesmen, written in a compendious and popular style,
adapted especially for school reading, where it has always been in great
request. besides these there are short accounts of hamilcar and hannibal,
and of the romans, cato and atticus. the last-mentioned biography is an
extract from a lost work, _de historicis latinis_, among whom friendship
prompts him to class the good-natured and cultivated banker. the series of
illustrious men extended over sixteen books, and was divided under the
headings of kings, generals, lawyers, orators, poets, historians,
philosophers, and grammarians. to each of these two books were devoted,
one of greek, and one of latin examples. [66] of those we possess the life
of atticus is the only one of any historical value, the rest being mere
superficial compilations, and not always from the best authorities.
besides the older generation, he had friends also among the younger.
catullus, who like him came from gallia cisalpina, pays in his first poem
the tribute of gratitude, due probably to his timely patronage. the work
mentioned there as that on which the fame of nepos rested was called
_chronica_. it seems to have been a laborious attempt to form a
comparative chronology of greek and roman history, and to have contained
three books. subsequently, he preferred biographical studies, in which
field, besides his chief work, he edited a series of _exempla_, or
patterns for imitation, of the character of our modern _self help_, and
intended to wean youthful minds from the corrupt fashions of their time. a
_life of cicero_ would probably be of great use to us, had fortune spared
it; for nepos knew cicero well, and had access through atticus to all his
correspondence. at atticus's request he wrote also a biography of cato at
greater length than the short one which we possess. it has been observed
by merivale [67] that the romans were specially fitted for biographical
writing. the rhetorical cast of their minds and the disposition to
reverence commanding merit made them admirable panygerists; and few would
celebrate where they did not mean to praise. of his general character as a
historian mr. oscar browning in his useful edition says: "he is most
untrustworthy. it is often difficult to disentangle the wilful
complications of his chronology; and he tries to enhance the value of what
he is relating by a foolish exaggeration which is only too transparent to
deceive." his style is clear, a merit attributable to the age in which he
lived, and, as a rule, elegant, though verging here and there to
prettiness. though of the same age as caesar he adopts a more modern
latinity. we miss the quarried marble which polish hardens but does not
wear away. nepos's language is a softer substance, and becomes thin
beneath the file. he is occasionally inaccurate. in the _phocion_ [68] we
have a sentence incomplete; in the _chabrias_ [69] we have an accusative
(_agesilaum_) with nothing to govern it; we have _ante se_ for _ante eum_,
a fault, by the way, into which almost every latin writer is apt to fall,
since the rules on which the true practice is built are among the subtlest
in any language. [70] we have poetical constructions, as _tollere consilia
iniit_; popular ones, as _infitias it, dum_ with the perfect tense, and
colloquialisms like _impraesentiarum_; we have graecizing words like
_deuteretur, automatias_, and curious inflexions such as _thuynis, coti,
datami_, genitives of _thuys, cotys_, [71] and _datames_, respectively. we
see in nepos, as in xenophon, the first signs of a coming change. he forms
a link between the exclusively prosaic style of cicero and caesar, and
prose softened and coloured with poetic beauties, which was brought to
such perfection by livy.

after the life of hannibal, in the ms., occurred an epigram by the
grammarian aemilius probus inscribing the work to theodosius. by this
scholars were long misled. it was lambinus who first proved that the pure
latinity of the lives could not, except by magic, be the product of the
theodosian age; and as ancient testimony amply justified the assignment of
the life of atticus to nepos, and he was known also to have been the
author of just such a book as came out under probus's name, the great
scholar boldly drew the conclusion that the series of biographies we
possess were the veritable work of nepos. for a time controversy raged. a
_via media_ was discovered which regarded them as an abridgment in
theodosius's time of the fuller original work. but even this, which was
but a concession to prejudice, is now generally abandoned, and few would
care to dispute the accuracy of lambinus's penetrating criticism. [72]

the first artistic historian of rome is c. sallustius crispus (86-34
b.c.). this great writer was born at amiternum in the year in which marius
died, and, as we know from himself, he came to rome burning with ambition
to ennoble his name, and studied with that purpose the various arts of
popularity. he rose steadily through the quaestorship to the tribuneship
of the plebs (52 b.c.), and so became a member of the senate. from this
position he was degraded (50 b.c.) on the plea of adultery, committed some
years before with the wife of annius milo, a disgrace he seems to have
deeply felt, although it was probably instigated by political and not
moral disapprobation. for sallust was a warm admirer and partisan of
caesar, who in time (47 b.c.) made him praetor, thus restoring his rank;
and assigned him (46 b.c.) the province of numidia, from which he carried
an enormous fortune, for the most part, we fear, unrighteously obtained.
on his return (45 b.c.), content with his success, he sank into private
life; and to the leisure and study of his later years we owe the works
that have made him famous. he employed his wealth in ministering to his
comfort. his favourite retreats were a villa at tibur which had once been
caesar's, and a magnificent palace which he built in the suburbs of rome,
surrounded by pleasure-grounds, afterwards well-known as the "gardens of
sallust," and as the residence of successive emperors. the preacher of
ancient virtue was an adept in modern luxury. augustus chose the
historian's dwelling as the scene of his most sumptuous entertainments;
vespasian preferred it to the palace of the caesars; nerva and aurelian,
stern as they were, made it their constant abode. [73] and yet sallust was
not a happy man. the inconsistency of conduct and the whirlwind of
political passion in which most men then lived seems to have sapped the
springs of life and worn out body and mind before their time. caesar's
activity had at his death begun to make him old; [74] sallust lived only
to the age of 52; lucretius and catullus were even younger when they died.
and the views of life presented in their works are far from hopeful.
sallust, indeed, praises virtue; but it is an ideal of the past, colossal
but extinct, on which his gloomy eloquence is exhausted. among his
contemporaries he finds no vestige of ancient goodness; honour has become
a traffic, ambition has turned to avarice, and envy has taken the place of
public spirit. from this scene of turpitude he selects two men who in
diverse ways recall the strong features of antiquity. these are caesar and
cato; the one the idol of the people, whom with real persuasion they
adored as a god; [75] the other the idol of the senate, whom the pompeian
poet exalts even above the gods. [76] the contrast and balancing of the
virtues of these two great men is one of the most effective passages in
sallust. [77]

from his position in public life and from his intimacy with caesar, he had
gained excellent opportunities of acquiring correct information. the
desire to write history seems to have come on him in later life. success
had no more illusions for him. the bitterness with which he touches on his
early misfortunes [78] shows that their memory still rankled within him.
and the pains with which he justifies his historical pursuits indicate a
stifled anxiety to enter once more the race for honours, which yet
experience tells him is but vanity. the profligacy of his youth, grossly
overdrawn by malice, [79] was yet no doubt a ground of remorse; and though
the severity of his opening chapters is somewhat ostentatious, there is no
intrinsic mark of insincerity about them. they are, it is true, quite
superfluous. iugurtha's trickery can be understood without a preliminary
discourse on the immortality of the soul; and catiline's character is not
such as to suggest a preface on the dignity of writing history. but with
all their inappropriateness, these introductions are valuable specimens of
the writer's best thoughts and concentrated vigour of language. in the
_catiline_, his earliest work, he announces his attention of subjecting
certain episodes of roman history [80] to a thorough treatment, omitting
those parts which had been done justice to by former writers. thus it is
improbable that sallust touched the period of sulla, [81] both from the
high opinion he formed of sisenna's account, and from the words _neque
alio loco de sullae rebus dicturi sumus_; [82] nevertheless, some of the
events he selected doubtless fell within sulla's lifetime, and this may
have given rise to the opinion that he wrote a history of the dictator.
though sallust's _historiae_ are generally described as a consecutive work
from the premature movements of lepidus on sulla's death [83] (78 b.c.) to
the end of the mithridatic war (63 b.c.); this cannot be proved. it is
equally possible that his series of independent historical cameos may have
been published together, arranged in chronological order, and under the
common title of _historiae_. the _iugurtha_ and _catilina_, however, are
separate works; they are always quoted as such, and formed a kind of
commencement and finish to the intermediate studies.

of the histories (in five books dedicated to the younger lucullus), we
have but a few fragments, mostly speeches, of which the style seems a
little fuller than usual: our judgment of the writer must be based upon
the two essays that have reached us entire, that on the war with iugurtha,
and that on the catilinarian conspiracy. sallust takes credit to himself,
in words that tacitus has almost adopted, [84] for a strict impartiality.
compared with his predecessors he probably _was_ impartial, and
considering the closeness of the events to his own time it is doubtful
whether any one could have been more so. for he wisely confined himself to
periods neither too remote for the testimony of eye-witnesses, nor too
recent for the disentanglement of truth. when catiline fell (63 b.c.) the
historian was twenty-two years old, and this is the latest point to which
his studies reach. as a friend of caesar he was an enemy of cicero, and
two declamations are extant, the productions of the reign of claudius,
[85] in which these two great men vituperate one another. but no
vituperation is found in sallust's works. there is, indeed, a coldness and
reserve, a disinclination to praise the conduct and even the oratory of
the consul which bespeaks a mind less noble than cicero's, [86] but facts
are not perverted, nor is the odium of an unconstitutional act thrown on
cicero alone, as we know it was thrown by caesar's more unscrupulous
partisans, and connived at by caesar himself. the veneration of sallust
for his great chief is conspicuous. caesar is brought into steady
prominence; his influence is everywhere implied. but sallust, however
clearly he betrays the ascendancy of caesar over himself, [87] does not on
all points follow his lead. while, with caesar, he believes fortune, or
more properly chance, to rule human affairs, he retains his belief in
virtue and immortality, [88] both of which caesar rejected. he can not
only admit, but glorify the virtues of cato, which caesar ridiculed and
denied. but he is anxious to set the democratic policy in the most
favourable light. hence he depicts cato rather than cicero as the
senatorial champion, because his impracticable views seemed to justify
caesar's opposition; [89] he throws into fierce relief the vices of
scaurus who was _princeps senatus_; [90] and misrepresents the conduct of
turpilius through a desire to screen marius. [91] as to his authorities,
we find that he gave way to the prevailing tendency to manipulate them.
the speeches of caesar and cato in the senate, which he surely might have
transcribed, he prefers to remodel according to his own ideas, eloquently
no doubt, but the originals would have been in better place, and entitled
him to our gratitude. the same may be said of the speech of marius. that
of memmius [92] he professes to give intact; but its genuineness is
doubtful. the letter of catiline to catulus, that of lentulus and his
message to catiline, may be accepted as original documents. [93] in the
sifting of less accessible authorities he is culpably careless. his
account of the early history of africa is almost worthless, though he
speaks of having drawn it from the books of king hiempsal, and taken pains
to insert what was generally thought worthy of credit. it is in the
delineation of character that sallust's penetration is unmistakably shown.
besides the instances already given, we may mention the admirable sketch
of sulla, [94] and the no less admirable ones of catiline [95] and
iugurtha. [96] his power of depicting the terrors of conscience is
tremendous. no language can surpass in condensed but lifelike intensity
the terms in which he paints the guilty noble carrying remorse on his
countenance and driven by inward agony to acts of desperation. [97]

his style is peculiar. he himself evidently imitated, and was thought by
quintilian to rival, thucydides. [98] but the resemblance is in language
only. the deep insight of the athenian into the connexion of events is far
removed from the popular rhetoric in which the roman deplores the decline
of virtue. and the brevity, by which both are characterised, while in the
one it is nothing but the incapacity of the hand to keep pace with the
rush of thought, in the other forms the artistic result of a careful
process of excision and compression. while the one kindles reflection, the
other baulks it. nevertheless the style of sallust has a special charm and
will always find admirers to give it the palm among latin histories. the
archaisms which adorn or deface it, the poetical constructions which tinge
its classicality, the rough periods without particles of connexion which
impart to it a masculine hardness, are so fused together into a harmonious
fabric that after the first reading most students recur to it with genuine
pleasure. [99] on the whole it is more modern than that of nepos, and
resembles more than any other that of tacitus. its brevity rarely falls
into obscurity, though it sometimes borders on affectation. there is an
appearance as if he was never satisfied, but always straining after an
excellence beyond his powers. it is emphatically a cultured style, and, as
such often recalls older authors. now it is a reminiscence of homer:
_aliud clausum in pectore, aliud in lingua promptum habere_; [100] now of
a latin tragedian: _secundae res sapientium animos fatigant_. much
allowance must be made for sallust's defects, when we remember that no
model of historical writing yet existed at rome. some of the aphorisms
which are scattered in his book are wonderfully condensed, and have passed
into proverbs. _concordia parvae res crescunt_ from the _iugurtha_; and
_idem velle, idem nolle, ea demum firma amicitia est_, from the
_catiline_, are instances familiar to all. the prose of sallust differs
from that of cicero in being less rhythmical; the hexametrical ending
which the orator rightly rejects, is in him not infrequent. it is probably
a concession to greek habit. [101] sallust did good service in pointing
out what historical writing should be, and his example was of such service
to livy that, had it not been for him, it is possible the great master-
history would never have been designed.

it does not appear that this period was fruitful in historians. tubero
(49-47 b.c.) is the only other whose works are mentioned; the convulsions
of the state, the short but sullen repose, broken by caesar's death (44
b.c.), the bloodthirsty sway of the triumvirs, and the contests which
ended in the final overthrow at actium (31 b.c.), were not favourable to
historical enterprise. but private notes were carefully kept, and men's
memories were strengthened by silence, so that circumstances naturally
inculcated waiting in patience until the time for speaking out should have
arrived. [102]


appendix.

_on the acta diurna and acta senatus._

it is well known that there was a sort of journal at rome analogous,
perhaps, to our _gazette_, but its nature and origin are somewhat
uncertain. suetonius (caes. 20) has this account: "_inito honore, primus
omnium instituit, ut tam senatus quam populi diurna acta conficerentur et
publicarentur_," which seems naturally to imply that the people's _acta_
had been published every day before caesar's consulship, and that he did
the same thing for the _acta_ of the senate. before investigating these we
must distinguish them from certain other _acta_:--(1) _civilia_,
containing a register of births, deaths, marriages, and divorces, called
_apographai_ by polybius, and alluded to by cicero (_ad fam._ viii. 7) and
others. these were at first intrusted to the care of the censors,
afterwards to the praefecti aerarii. (2) _forensia_, comprising lists of
laws, plebiscites, elections of aediles, tribunes, &c. like the _daemosia
grammata_ at athens, placed among the archives annexed to various temples,
especially that of saturn. (3) _iudiciaria_, the legal reports, often
called _gesta_, kept in a special _tabularium_, under the charge of
military men discharged from active service. (4) _militaria_, which
contained reports of all the men employed in war, their height, age,
conduct, accomplishments, &c. these were entrusted to an officer called
_librarius legionis_ (veg. ii. 19), or sometimes _tabularius castrensis_,
but so only in the later latin. other less strictly formal documents, as
lists of cases, precedents, &c. seem to have been also called _acta_, but
the above are the regular kinds.

the _acta senatus_ or deliberations of the senate were not published until
caesar. they were kept jealously secret, as is proved by a quaint story by
cato, quoted in aulus gellius (i. 23). at all important deliberations a
senator, usually the praetor as being one of the junior members, acted as
secretary. in the imperial times this functionary was always a confidant
of the emperor. the _acta_ were sometimes inscribed on _tabulae publicae_
(cic. pro sull. 14, 15), but only on occasions when it was held expedient
to make them known. as a rule the publication of the resolution (_senatus
consultum_) was the first intimation the people had of the decisions of
their rulers. in the times of the emperors there were also _acta_ of each
emperor, apparently the memoranda of state councils held by him, and
communicated to the senate for them to act upon. there appears also to
have been _acta_ of private families when the estates were large enough to
make it worth while to keep them. these are alluded to in petronius
arbiter (ch. 53). we are now come to the _acta diurna, populi, urbana_ or
_publica_, by all which names the same thing is meant. the earliest
allusion to them is in a passage of sempronius asellio, who distinguishes
the annals from the _diaria_, which the greeks call _ephaemeris_ (ap. a.
gell. v. 18). when about the year 131 b.c. the _annales_ were redacted
into a complete form, the _acta_ probably begun. when servius (ad. aen. i.
373) says that the _annales_ registered each day all noteworthy events
that had occurred, he is apparently confounding them with the _acta_,
which seem to have quietly taken their place. during the time that cicero
was absent in cilicia (62 b.c.) he received the news of town from his
friend. coelius (cic. fam. viii. 1, 8, 12, &c.). these news comprised all
the topics which we should find now-a-days in a daily paper. asconius
pedianus, a commentator on cicero of the time of claudius, in his notes on
the milo (p. 47, ed. orell. 1833), quotes several passages from the
_acta_, on the authority of which he bases some of his arguments. among
them are analyses of forensic orations, political and judicial; and it is
therefore probable that these formed a regular portion of the daily
journal in the latest age of the republic. when antony offered caesar a
crown on the feast of the lupercalia, caesar ordered it to be noted in the
_acta_ (dio xliv. 11); antony, as we know from cicero, even entered the
fact in the _fasti_, or religious calendar. augustus continued the
publication of the _acta populi_, under certain limitations, analogous to
the control exercised over journalism by the governments of modern europe;
but he interdicted that of the _acta senatus_ (suet. aug. 36). later
emperors abridged even this liberty. a portico in rome having been in
danger of falling and shored up by a skilful architect, tiberius forbade
the publication of his name (dio lvii. 21). nero relaxed the supervision
of the press, but it was afterwards re-established. for the genuine
fragments of the _acta_, see the treatise by vict. le clerc, _sur les
journaux chez les romains_, from which this notice is taken.




chapter iv.

the history of poetry to the close of the republic--rise of alexandrinism
--lucretius--catullus.


as long as the drama was cultivated poetry had not ceased to be popular in
its tone. but we have already mentioned that coincidentally with the rise
of sulla dramatic productiveness ceased. we hear, indeed, that j. caesar
strabo (about 90 b.c.) wrote tragedies, but they were probably never
performed. comedy, as hitherto practised, was almost equally mute. the
only forms that lingered on were the _atellanae_, and those few plebeian
types of comedy known as _togata_ and _tabernaria_. but even these had now
withered. the present epoch brings before us a fresh type of composition
in the _mime_, which now first took a literary shape. mimes had indeed
existed in some sort from a very early period, but no art had been applied
to their cultivation, and they had held a position much inferior to that
of the national farce. but several circumstances now conspired to bring
them into greater prominence. first, the great increase of luxury and
show, and with it the appetite for the gaudy trappings of the _spectacle_;
secondly, the failure of legitimate drama, and the fact that the
_atellanae_, with their patrician surroundings, were only half popular;
and lastly, the familiarity with the different offshoots of greek comedy,
thrown out in rank profusion at alexandria, and capable of assimilation
with the plastic materials of the _mimus_. these worthless products,
issued under the names of rhinthon, sopater, sciras, and timon, were
conspicuous for the entire absence of restraint with which they treated
serious subjects, as well as for a merry-andrew style of humour easily
naturalised, if it were not already present, among the huge concourse of
idlers who came to sate their appetite for indecency without altogether
sacrificing the pretence of a dramatic spectacle. two things marked off
the _mimus_ from the _atellana_ or national farce; the players appeared
without masks, [1] and women were allowed to act. this opened the gates to
licentiousness. we find from cicero that _mimae_ bore a disreputable
character, [2] but from their personal charms and accomplishments often
became the chosen companions of the profligate nobles of the day. under
the empire this was still more the case. kingsley, in his _hypatia_, has
given a lifelike sketch of one of these elegant but dissolute females. to
these seductive innovations the mime added some conservative features. it
absorbed many characteristics of legitimate comedy. the actors were not
necessarily _planipedes_ in fact, though they remained so in name; [3]
they might wear the _soccus_ [4] and the greek dress [5] of the higher
comedy. the mimes seem to have formed at this time interludes between the
acts of a regular drama. hence they were at once simple and short,
seasoned with as many coarse jests as could be crowded into a limited
compass, with plenty of music, dancing, and expressive gesture-language.
their plot was always the same, and never failed to please; it struck the
key-note of all decaying societies, the discomfiture of the husband by the
wife. [6] nevertheless, popular as was the mime, it was, even in caesar's
time, obliged to share the palm of attractiveness with bear-fights, boxing
matches, processions of strange beasts, foreign treasures, captives of
uncouth aspect, and other curiosities, which passed sometimes for hours
across the stage, feeding the gaze of an unlettered crowd, to the utter
exclusion of drama and interlude alike. thirty years later, horace [7]
declares that against such competitors no play could get a silent hearing.

this being the lamentable state of things, we are surprised to find that
mime writing was practised by two men of vigorous talent and philosophic
culture, whose fragments, so far from betraying any concession to the
prevailing depravity, are above the ordinary tone of ancient comic
morality. they are the knight d. laberius (106-43 b.c.) and publilius
syrus (fl. 44 b.c.), an enfranchised syrian slave. it is probable that
caesar lent his countenance to these writers in the hope of raising their
art. his patronage was valuable; but he put a great indignity (45 b.c.) on
laberius. the old man, for he was then sixty years of age, had written
mimes for a generation, but had never acted in them himself. caesar, whom
he may have offended by indiscreet allusions, [8] recommended him to
appear in person against his rival syrus. this recommendation, as he well
knew, was equivalent to a command. in the prologue he expresses his sense
of the affront with great manliness and force of language. we quote some
lines from it, as a specimen of the best plebeian latin;

  "necessitas, cuius cursus, transversi impetum
  voluerunt multi effugere, pauci potuerunt,
  quo me detrusit paene extremis sensibus?
  quem nulla ambitio, nulla unquam largitio,
  nullus timor, vis nulla, nulla auctoritas
  movere potuit in inventa de statu,
  ecce in senecta ut facile labefecit loco
  viri excellentis mente clemente edita
  summissa placide blandiloquens oratio!
  et enim ipsi di negare cui nil potuerunt,
  hominem me denegare quis posset pati?
  ego bis tricenis actis annis sine nota,
  eques romanus e lare egressus meo,
  domum revertormimus--ni mirum hoc die
  uno plus vixi mihi quam vivendum fuit.
       *       *       *       *       *
  porro, quirites, libertatem perdimus." [9]

in these noble lines we see the native eloquence of a free spirit. but the
poet's wrathful muse roused itself in vain. caesar awarded the prize to
syrus, saying to laberius in an impromptu verse of polite condescension,

  "favente tibime victus, laberi, es a syro." [10]

from this time the old knight surrendered the stage to his younger and
more polished rival.

syrus vas a native of antioch, and remarkable from his childhood for the
beauty of his person and his sparkling wit, to which he owed his freedom.
his talent soon raised him to eminence as an improvisatore and dramatic
declaimer. he trusted mostly to extempore inspiration when acting his
mimes, but wrote certain episodes where it was necessary to do so. his
works abounded with moral apophthegms, tersely expressed. we possess 857
verses, arranged in alphabetical order, ascribed to him, of which perhaps
half are genuine. this collection was made early in the middle ages, when
it was much used for purposes of education. we append a few examples of
these sayings: [11]

  "beneficium dando accipit, qui digno dedit."

  "furor fit laesa saepius patientia."

  "comes facundus in via pro vehiculo est."

  "nimium altercando veritas amittitur."

  "iniuriarum remedium est oblivio."

  "malum est consilium quod mutari non potest."

  "nunquam periclum sine periclo vincitar."

horace mentions laberius not uncomplimentarily, though he professes no
interest in the sort of composition he represented. [12] perhaps he judged
him by his audience. besides these two men, cn. matius (about 44 b.c.)
also wrote _mimiambi_ about the same date. they are described as _mimicae
fabulae, versibus plerunque iambicis conscriptae_, [13] and appear to have
differed in some way from the actual mimes, probably in not being
represented on the stage. they reappear in the time of pliny, whose friend
verginius romanus (he tells us in one of his letters) [14] wrote mimiambi
_tenuiter, argute, venuste, et in hoc genere eloquentissime_. this shows
that for a long tune a certain refinement and elaboration was compatible
with the style of mime writing. [15]

the _pantomimi_ have been confused with the _mimi_; but they differed in
being dancers, not actors; they represent the inevitable development of
the mimic art, which, as ovid says in his _tristia_, [16] even in its
earlier manifestations, enlisted the eye as much as the ear. in imperial
times they almost engrossed the stage. pylades and bathyllus are monuments
of a depraved taste, which could raise these men to offices of state, and
seek their society with such zeal that the emperors were compelled to
issue stringent enactments to forbid it. tigellius seems to have been the
first of these _effeminati_; he is satirised by horace, [17] but his
influence was inappreciable compared with that of his successors. the
pantomimus aspired to render the emotions of terror or love more
speakingly by gesture than it was possible to do by speech; and ancient
critics, while deploring, seem to have admitted this claim. the moral
effect of such exhibitions may be imagined. [18]

it is pleasing to find that in cicero's time the interpretation of the
great dramatists' conceptions exercised the talents of several illustrious
actors, the two best-known of whom are aesopus, the tragedian (l22-54
b.c.), and roscius, the comic actor (120-61? b.c.), [19] after the
exhaustion of dramatic creativeness a period of splendid representation
naturally follows. it was so in germany and england, it was so at rome. of
the two men, roscius was the greater master; he was so perfect in his art
that his name became a synonym for excellence in any branch. [20] neither
of them, however, embraced, as garrick did, both departments of the art;
their provinces were and always remained distinct. both had the privilege
of cicero's friendship; both no doubt lent him the benefit of their
professional advice. the interchange of hints between an orator and an
actor was not unexampled. when hortensius spoke, roscius always attended
to study his suggestive gestures, and it is told of cicero himself that he
and roscius strove which could express the higher emotions more perfectly
by his art. roscius was a native of solonium, a latin town, his praenomen
was quintus; aesopus appears to have been a freedman of the claudia gens.
of other actors few were well-known enough to merit notice. some imagine
dossennus, mentioned by horace, [21] to have been an actor; but he is much
more likely to be the fabius dossennus quoted as an author of _atellanae_
by pliny in his _natural history_ [22] the freedom with which popular
actors were allowed to treat their original is shown by aesopus on one
occasion (62 b.c.?) changing the words _brutus qui patriam stabiliverat_
to _tullius_, a change which, falling in with the people's humour at the
moment, was vociferously applauded, and gratified cicero's vanity not a
little. [23] aesopus died soon after (54 b.c.); roscius did not live so
long. his marvellous beauty when a youth is the subject of a fine epigram
by lutatius catulus, already referred to. [24] both amassed large
fortunes, and lived in princely style.

while the stage was given up to mimes, cultured men wrote tragedies for
their improvement in command of language. both cicero and his brother
wrought assiduously at these frigid imitations. caesar followed in their
steps; and no doubt the practice was conducive to copiousness and to an
effective simulation of passion. their appearance as orators before the
people must have called out such different mental qualities from their
cold and calculating intercourse with one another, that tragedy writing as
well as declaiming may have been needful to keep themselves ready for an
emergency. cicero, as is well known, tried hard to gain fame as a poet.
the ridicule which all ages have lavished on his unhappy efforts has been
a severe punishment for his want of self-knowledge. still, judging from
the verses that remain, we cannot deny him the praise of a correct and
elegant _versateur_. besides several translations from homer and euripides
scattered through his works, and a few quotations by hostile critics from
his epic attempts, [25] we possess a large part of his translation of
aratus's _phaenomena_, written, indeed, in his early days, but a graceful
specimen of latin verse, and, as munro [26] has shown, carefully studied
and often imitated by lucretius. the most noticeable point of metre is his
disregard of the final s, no less than thrice in the first ninety lines, a
practice which in later life he stigmatised as _subrusticum_. in other
respects his hexameters are a decided advance on those of ennius in point
of smoothness though not of strength. he still affects greek caesuras
which are not suited to the latin cadence, [27] and his rhythm generally
lacks variety.

caesar's pen was nearly as prolific. he wrote besides an _oedipus_ a poem
called _laudes herculis_, and a metrical account of a journey into spain
called _iter_. [28] sportive effusions on various plants are attributed to
him by pliny. [29] all these augustus wisely refused to publish; but there
remain two excellent epigrams, one on terence, already alluded to, which
is undoubtedly genuine, [30] the other probably so, though others ascribe
it to germanicus or domitian. [31] but the rhythm, purity of language, and
continuous structure of the couplets seem to point indisputably to an
earlier age. it is as follows--

  "thrax puer, astricto glacie dum ludit in hebro,
    frigore concretas pondere rupit aquas.
  quumque imae partes rapido traherentur ab amne,
    abscidit, heu! tenerum lubrica testa caput.
  orba quod inventum mater dum conderet urna,
    'hoc peperi flammis, cetera,' dixit, 'aquis.'"

this is evidently a study from the greek, probably from an alexandrine
writer.

we have already had occasion more than once to mention the influence of
alexandria on roman literature. since the fall of carthage rome had had
much intercourse with the capital of the greek world. her thought,
erudition, and style, had acted strongly upon the rude imitators of greek
refinement. but hitherto the romans had not been ripe for receiving their
influence in full. in cicero's time, however, and in a great measure owing
to his labours, latin composition of all kinds had advanced so far that
writers, and especially poets, began to feel capable of rivalling their
alexandrian models. this type of hellenism was so eminently suited to
roman comprehension that, once introduced, it could not fail to produce
striking results. the results it actually produced were so vast, and in a
way so successful, that we must pause a moment to contemplate the rise of
the city which was connected with them.

alexander did not err in selecting the mouth of the nile for the capital
that should perpetuate his name. its site, its associations, religious,
artistic, and scientific, and the tide of commerce that was certain to
flow through it, all suggested the coast of egypt as the fittest point of
attraction for the industry of the eastern world, while the rapid fall of
the other kingdoms that rose from the ruins of his empire contributed to
make the new merchant city the natural inheritor of his great ideas. the
ptolemies well fulfilled the task which alexander's foresight had set
before them. they aspired to make their capital the centre not only of
commercial but of intellectual production, and the repository of all that
was most venerable in religion, literature, and art. to achieve this end,
they acted with the magnificence as well as the unscrupulousness of great
monarchs. at their command, a princely city rose from the sandhills and
rushes of the canopic mouth; stately temples uniting greek proportion with
egyptian grandeur, long quays with sheltered docks, ingenious contrivances
for purifying the nile water and conducting a supply to every considerable
house; [32] in short, every product of a luxurious civilisation was found
there, except the refreshing shade of green trees, which, beyond a few of
the commoner kinds, could not be forced to grow on the shifting sandy
soil. the great glory of alexandria, however, was its public library,
founded by soter (306-285 b.c.), greatly extended by philadelphus (285-247
b.c.), under whom grammatical studies attained their highest development,
enriched by euergetes (247-212 b.c.) with genuine mss. of authors
fraudulently obtained from their owners to whom he sent back copies made
by his own librarians, [33] this collection reached under the last-named
sovereign the enormous total of 532,800 volumes, of which the great
majority were kept in the museum which formed part of the royal palace,
and about 50,000 of the most precious in the temple of serapis, the patron
deity of the city. [34] connected with the museum were various endowments
analogous to our professorships and fellowships of colleges; under the
ptolemies the head librarian, in after times the professor of rhetoric,
held the highest post within this ancient university. the librarian was
usually chief priest of one of the greatest gods, isis, osiris, or
serapis. [35] his appointment was for life, and lay at the disposal of the
monarch. thus the museum was essentially a court institution, and its
_savants_ and _litterateurs_ were accomplished courtiers and men of the
world. learning being thus nursed as in a hot-bed, its products were rank,
but neither hardy nor natural. they took the form of recondite
mythological erudition, grammar and exegesis, and laborious imitation of
the ancients. in science only was there a healthy spirit of research.
mathematics were splendidly represented by euclid and archimedes,
geography by eratosthenes, astronomy by hipparchus; for these men, though
not all residents in alexandria, all gained their principles and method
from study within her walls. to aristarchus (fl. 180 b.c.) and his
contemporaries we owe the final revision of the greek classic texts; and
the service thus done to scholarship and literature was incalculable. but
the earlier alexandrines seem to have been overwhelmed by the vastness of
material at their command. except in pastoral poetry, which in reality was
not alexandrine, [36] there was no creative talent shown for centuries.
the true importance of alexandria in the history of thought dates from
plotinus (about 200 a.d.), who first clearly taught that mystic philosophy
which under the name of _neoplatonism_, has had so enduring a fascination
for the human spirit. it was not, however, for philosophy, science, or
theology that the romans went to alexandria. it was for literary models
which should less hopelessly defy imitation than those of old greece, and
for general views of life which should approve themselves to their growing
enlightenment. these they found in the half-greek, half-cosmopolitan
culture which had there taken root and spread widely in the east. even
before alexander's death there had been signs of the internal break-up of
hellenism, now that it had attained its perfect development. out of athens
pure hellenism had at no time been able to express itself successfully in
literature. and even in athens the burden of atticism, if we may say so,
seems to have become too great to bear. we see a desire to emancipate both
thought and expression from the exquisite but confining proportions within
which they had as yet moved. the student of euripides observes a struggle,
ineffectual it is true, but pregnant with meaning, against all that is
most specially recognised as conservative and national. [37] he strives to
pour new wine into old bottles; but in this case the bottles are too
strong for him to burst. the atticism which had guided and comprehended,
now began to cramp development. to make a world-wide out of a hellenic
form of thought, it is necessary to go outside the charmed soil of greece.
only on the banks of the nile will the new culture find a shrine, whose
remote and mysterious authority frees it from the spell of hellenism, now
no longer the exponent of the world's thought, while it is near enough to
the arena where human progress is fighting its way onward, to inspire and
be inspired by the mighty nation that is succeeding greece as the
representative of mankind.

the contribution of alexandria to human progress consists, then, in its
recoil from greek exclusiveness, in its sifting of what was universal in
greek thought from what was national, and presenting the former in a
systematised form for the enlightenment of those who received it. this is
its nobler side; the side which men like ennius and scipio seized, and
welded into a harmonious union with the higher national tradition of rome,
out of which union arose that complex product to which the name
_humanitas_ was so happily given. but alexandrian culture was more than
cosmopolitan. it was in a sense anti-national. egyptian superstition,
theurgy, magic, and charlatanism of every sort, tried to amalgamate with
the imported greek culture. in greece itself they had never done this. the
clear light of greek intellect had no fellowship with the obscure or the
mysterious. it drove them into corners and let them mutter in secret. but
the moment the lamp of culture was given into other hands, they started up
again unabashed and undismayed. the alexandrine thinkers struggled to make
greek influences supreme, to exclude altogether those of the east; and
their efforts were for three centuries successful: neither mysticism nor
magic reigned in the museum of the ptolemies. but this victory was
purchased at a severe cost. the enthusiasm of the alexandrian scholars had
made them pedants. they gradually ceased to care for the thought of
literature, and busied themselves only with questions of learning and of
form. their multifarious reading made them think that they too had a
literary gift. philetas was not only a profound logician, but he affected
to be an amatory poet. [38] callimachus, the brilliant and courtly
librarian of philadelphus, wrote nearly every kind of poetry that existed.
aratus treated the abstruse investigations of eudoxus in neat verses that
at once became popular. while in the great periods of greek art each
writer had been content to excel in a single branch, it now became the
fashion for the same poet to be epicist, lyrist, and elegy-writer at once.

besides the new treatment of old forms, there were three kinds of poetry,
first developed or perfected at alexandria, which have special interest
for us from the great celebrity they gained when imported into rome. they
are the didactic poem, the erotic elegy, and the epigram. the maxim of
callimachus (characteristic as it is of his narrow mind) _mega biblion
mega kakon_, "a great book is a great evil," [39] was the rule on which
these poetasters generally acted. the didactic poem is an illegitimate
cross between science and poetry. in the creative days of greece it had no
place. hesiod, parmenides, and empedocles were, indeed, cited as examples.
but in their days poetry was the only vehicle of literary effort, and he
who wished to issue accurate information was driven to embody it in verse.
in the time of the ptolemies things were altogether different. it was
consistent neither with the exactness of science nor with the grace of the
muses to treat astronomy or geography as subjects for poetry. still, the
best masters of this style undoubtedly attained great renown, and have
found brilliant imitators, not only in roman, but in modern times.

aratus (280 b.c.), known as the model of cicero's, and in a later age of
domitian's [40] youthful essays in verse, was born at soli in cilicia
about three hundred years before christ. he was not a scientific man, [41]
but popularised in hexameter verse the astronomical works of eudoxus, of
which he formed two poems, the _phaenomena_ and the _diosemia_, or
prognostics. these were extravagantly praised, and so far took the place
of their original that commentaries were written on them by learned men,
[42] while the works of eudoxus were in danger of being forgotten.
nicander (230 b.c.?), still less ambitious, wrote a poem on remedies for
vegetable and mineral poisons (_alexipharmaka_), and for the bites of
beasts (_thaeriaka_), and another on the habits of birds (_ornithogonia_).
these attracted the imitation of macer in the augustan age. but the most
celebrated poets were callimachus (260 b.c.) and philetas [43] (280 b.c.),
who formed the models of propertius. to them we owe the erotic elegy,
whether personal or mythological, and all the pedantic ornament of
fictitious passion which such writings generally display. more will be
said about them when we come to the elegiac poets. callimachus, however,
seems to have carried his art, such as it was, to perfection. he is
generally considered the prince of elegists, and his extant fragments show
great nicety and finish of expression. the sacrilegious theft of the locks
of berenice's hair from the temple where she had offered them, was a
subject too well suited to a courtier's muse to escape treatment. its
celebrity is due to the translation made by catullus, and the
appropriation of the idea by pope in his _rape of the lock_. the short
epigram was also much in vogue at alexandria, and neat examples abound in
the _anthology_. but in all these departments the romans imitated with
such zest and vigour that they left their masters far behind. ovid and
martial are as superior in their way to philetas and callimachus as
lucretius and virgil to aratus and apollonius rhodius. this last-mentioned
poet, apollonius rhodius (fl. 240 b.c.), demands a short notice. he was
the pupil of callimachus, and the most genuinely-gifted of all the
alexandrine school; he incurred the envy and afterwards the rancorous
hatred of his preceptor, through whose influence he was obliged to leave
alexandria and seek fame at rhodes. here he remained all his life and
wrote his most celebrated poem, the _epic of the argonauts_, a combination
of sentiment, learning, and graceful expression, which is less known than
it ought to be. its chief interest to us is the use made of it by virgil,
who studied it deeply and drew much from it. we observe the passion of
love as a new element in heroic poetry, scarcely treated in greece, but
henceforth to become second to none in prominence, and through dido, to
secure a place among the very highest flights of song. [44] jason and
medea, the hero and heroine, who love one another, create a poetical era.
an epicist of even greater popularity was euphorion of chalcis (274-203
b.c.), whose affected prettiness and rounded cadences charmed the ears of
the young nobles. he had admirers who knew him by heart, who declaimed him
at the baths, [45] and quoted his pathetic passages _ad nauseam_. he was
the inventor of the historical romance in verse, of which rome was so
fruitful. a lucan, a silius, owe their inspiration in part to him. lastly,
we may mention that the drama could find no place at alexandria. only
learned compilations of recondite legend and frigid declamation, almost
unintelligible from the rare and obsolete words with which they were
crowded, were sent forth under the name of plays. the _cassandra_ or
_alexandra_ of lycophron is the only specimen that has come to us. its
thorny difficulties deter the reader, but fox speaks of it as breathing a
rich vein of melancholy. the _thyestes_ of varius and the _medea_ of ovid
were no doubt greatly improved copies of dramas of this sort.

it will be seen from this survey of alexandrine letters that the better
side of their influence was soon exhausted. any breadth of view they
possessed was seized and far exceeded by the nobler minds that imitated
it; and all their other qualities were such as to enervate rather than
inspire. the masculine rudeness of the old poets now gave way to pretty
finish; verbal conceits took the place of condensed thoughts; the rich
exuberance of the native style tried to cramp itself into the arid
allusiveness which, instead of painting straight from nature, was content
to awaken a long line of literary associations. nevertheless there was
much in their manipulation of language from which the romans could learn a
useful lesson. it was impossible for them to catch the original impulse of
the divine seer [46]--

  _autodidaktos d'eimi, theos de moi en phresin oimas pantoias enephysen._

from poverty of genius they were forced to draw less flowing draughts from
the castalian spring. the bards of old greece were hopelessly above them.
the alexandrines, by not overpowering their efforts, but offering them
models which they felt they could not only equal but immeasurably excel,
did real service in encouraging and stimulating the roman muse. great
critics like niebuhr and, within certain limits, munro, regret the
mingling of the alexandrine channel with the stream of latin poetry, but
without it we should perhaps not have had catullus and certainly neither
ovid nor virgil.

it may easily be supposed that the national party, whether in politics or
letters, would set themselves with all their might to oppose the rising
current. the great majority surrendered themselves to it with a good will.
among the stern reactionists in prose, we have mentioned varro; in poetry,
by far the greatest name is lucretius. but little is known of lucretius's
life; even the date of his birth is uncertain. st. jerome, in the eusebian
chronicle, [47] gives 95 b.c. others have with more probability assigned
an earlier date. it is from jerome that we learn those facts which have
cast a strong interest round the poet, viz. that he was driven mad by a
love potion, that he composed in the intervals of insanity his poem, which
cicero afterwards corrected, and that he perished by his own hand in the
forty-fourth year of his age. jerome does not quote any contemporary
authority; his statements, coming 500 years after the event, must go for
what they are worth, but may perhaps meet with a qualified acceptance. the
intense earnestness of the poem indicates a mind that we can well conceive
giving way under the overwhelming thought which stirred it; and the
example of a philosopher anticipating the stroke of nature is too often
repeated in roman history to make it incredible in this case. tennyson
with a poet's sympathy has surrounded this story with the deepest pathos,
and it will probably remain the accepted, if not the established, version
of his death.

though born in a high position, he seems to have stood aloof from society.
from first to last his book betrays the close and eager student. he was an
intimate friend of the worthless c. memmius, whom he extols in a manner
creditable to his heart but not to his judgment. [48] but he was no
flatterer, nor was memmius a patron. poet and statesman lived on terms of
perfect equality. of the date of his work we can so far conjecture that it
was certainly unfinished at his death (55 b.c.), and from its scope and
information must have extended over some years. the allusion [49]--

  "nam neque nos agere hoc patriai tempore iniquo
  possumus aequo animo, nec memmi clara propago
  talibus in rebus communi desse saluti,"

is considered by prof. sellar to point to the praetorship of memmius (58
b.c.). the work was long thought to have been edited by cicero after the
poet's death; but though he had read the poem, [50] and admitted its
talent, he would doubtless have mentioned, at least to atticus, the fact
of the editing, had it occurred. some critics, arguing from cicero's
silence and known opposition to the epicurean tenets, have thought that
jerome referred to q. cicero the orator's brother, but for this there is
no authority. the poem is entitled _de rerum natura_, an equivalent for
the greek _peri physeos_, the usual title of the pre-socratic
philosophers' works. the form, viz. a poem in heroic hexameters,
containing a carefully reasoned exposition, in which regard was had above
all to the claims of the subject-matter, was borrowed from the sicilian
thinker empedocles [51] (460 b.c.). but while aristotle denies empedocles
the title of _poet_ [52] on account of his scientific subject, no one
could think of applying the same criticism to lucretius a general view of
nature, as the power most near to man, and most capable of deeply moving
his heart, a power whose beauty, variety, and mystery, were the source of
his most perplexing struggles as well as of his purest joys; a desire to
hold communion with her, and to learn from her lips, opened only to the
ear of faith, those secrets which are hid from the vain world; this was
the grand thought that stirred the depths of lucretius's mind, and made
him the herald of a new and enduring form of verse. it has been well said
that didactic poetry was that in which the roman was best fitted to
succeed. it was in harmony with his utilitarian character. [53] to give a
practically useful direction to its labour was almost demanded from the
highest poetry. to say nothing of horace and lucilius, virgil's aeneid, no
less than his georgics, has a practical aim, and to an ardent spirit like
lucretius, poetry would be the natural vehicle for the truths to which he
longed to convert mankind.

in the selection of his models, his choice fell upon the older greek
writers, such as empedocles, aeschylus, thucydides, men renowned for deep
thought rather than elegant expression; and among the romans, upon ennius
and pacuvius, the giants of a ruder past. among contemporaries, cicero
alone seems to have awakened his admiration. thus he stands altogether
aloof from the fashionable standard of his day, a solitary beacon pointing
to landmarks once well known, but now crumbling into decay. [54]

lucretius is the only roman in whom the love of speculative truth [55]
prevails over every other feeling. in his day philosophy had sunk to an
endless series of disputes about words [56] frivolous quibbles and
captious logical proofs, comprised the highest exercises of the
speculative faculty. [57] the mind of lucretius harks back to the glorious
period of creative enthusiasm, when democritus, empedocles, anaxagoras,
plato, aristotle, zeno, and epicurus, successively believed that they had
solved the great questions of being and knowing. amid the zeal and
confidence of that mighty time his soul is at home. to epicurus as the
inventor of the true guide of life he pays a tribute of reverential
praise, calling him the pride of greece, [58] and exalting him to the
position of a god. [59] it is clear to one who studies this deeply
interesting poet that his mind was in the highest degree reverential. no
error could have been more fatal to his enjoyment of that equanimity,
whose absence he deplores, than to select a creed, at once so joyless and
barren in itself, and so unsuited to his ardent temperament.

when lucretius wrote, belief in the national religion had among the upper
classes become almost extinct. those who needed conviction as a support
for their life had no resource but greek philosophy. the speculations of
plato, except in his more popular works, were not attractive to the
romans; those of aristotle, brought to light in cicero's time by the
transference of apellicon's library to rome, [60] were a sealed book to
the majority, though certain works, probably dialogues after the platonic
manner, gained the admiration of cicero and quintilian. the pre-socratic
thinkers, occupied as they were with physical questions which had little
interest for romans, were still less likely to be resorted to. the demand
for a supreme moral end made it inevitable that their choice should fall
on one of the two schools which offered such an end, those of the porch
and the garden. which of the two would a man like lucretius prefer? the
answer is not so obvious as it appears. for lucretius has in him nothing
of the _epicurean_ in our sense. his austerity is nearer to that of the
stoic. it was the speculative basis underlying the ethical system, and not
the ethical system itself, that determined his choice. epicurus had allied
his theory of pleasure [61] with the atomic theory of democritus. stoicism
had espoused the doctrine of heraclitus, that fire is the primordial
element. epicurus had denied the indestructibility of the soul and the
divine government of the world; his gods were unconnected with mankind,
and lived at ease in the vacant spaces between the worlds. stoicism on the
contrary, had incorporated the popular theology, bringing it into
conformity with the philosophic doctrine of a single deity by means of
allegorical interpretation. its views of divine providence were
reconcilable with, while they elevated, the popular superstition.

lucretius had a strong hatred for the abuses into which state-craft and
luxury had allowed the popular creed to fall; he was also firmly convinced
of the sufficiency of democritus's two postulates (_atoms_ and _the void_)
to account for all the phenomena of the universe. hence he gave his
unreserved assent to the epicurean system, which he expounds, mainly in
its physical outlines, in his work; the ethical tenets being interwoven
with the bursts of enthusiastic poetry which break, or the countless
touches which adorn, the sustained course of his argument.

the defects of the ancient scientific method are not wanting in him.
generalising from a few superficial instances, reasoning _a priori_,
instead of winning his way by observation and comparison up to the
universal truth, fancying that it was possible for a single mind to grasp,
and for a system by a few bold hypotheses to explain, the problem of
external nature, of the soul, of the existence of the gods: such are the
obvious defects which lucretius shares with his masters, and of which the
experience of ages has taught us the danger as well as the charm. but the
atomic system has features which render it specially interesting at the
present day. its materialism, its attribution to nature of power
sufficient to carry out all her ends, its analysis of matter into ultimate
physical _individua_ incognisable by sense, while yet it insists that the
senses are the fountains of all knowledge, [62] are points which bring it
into correspondence with hypotheses at present predominant. its theory of
the development of society from the lower to the higher without break and
without divine intervention, and of the survival of the fittest in the
struggle for existence, its denial of design and claim to explain
everything by natural law, are also points of resemblance. finally, the
lesson he draws from this comfortless creed, not to sit with folded hands
in silent despair, nor to "eat and drink for to-morrow we die," but to
labour steadily for our greater good and to cultivate virtue in accordance
with reason, equally free from ambition and sloth, is strikingly like the
teaching of that scientific school [63] which claims for its system a
motive as potent to inspire self-denial as any that a more spiritual
philosophy can give.

lucretius, therefore, gains moral elevation by deserting the conclusion of
epicurus. while he does full justice to the poetical side of pleasure as
an end in itself, [64] he never insists on it as a motive to action. thus
he retains the conception as a noble ornament of his verse, but reserves
to himself, as every poet must, the liberty to adopt another tone if he
feels it higher or more appropriate. indeed, logical consistency of view
would be out of place in a poem; and lucretius is nowhere a truer poet
that when he sins against his own canons. [65] his instinct told him how
difficult it was to combine clear reasoning with a poetical garb,
especially as the latin language was not yet broken to the purposes of
philosophy. [66] nevertheless so complete is his mastery of the subject
that there is scarcely a difficulty arising from want of clearness of
expression from beginning to end of the poem. there are occasional
_lacunae_, and several passages out of place, which were either stop-gaps
intended to be replaced by lines more appropriate, or additions made after
the first draft of the work, which, had the author lived, would have been
wrought into the context. the first three books are quite or nearly quite
finished, and from them we can judge his power of presenting an argument.

his chief object he states to be not the discovery, but the exposition of
truth, for the purpose of freeing men's minds from religious terrors. this
he announces immediately after the invocation to venus, "mother of the
aeneadae," with which the poem opens. he then addresses himself to
memmius, whom he intreats not to be deterred from reading him by the
reproach of "rationalism." [67] he next states his first principle, which
is the denial of creation:

  "nullam rem e nilo gigni divinitus unquam,"

and asks, what then is the original substance out of which existing things
have arisen? the answer is, "atoms and the void, and beside them nothing
else:" these two principles are solid, self-existent, indestructible, and
invisible. he next investigates and refutes the first principles of other
philosophers, notably heraclitus, empedocles, and anaxagoras; and the book
ends with a short proof that the atoms are infinite in number and space
infinite in extent. the second book opens with a digression on the folly
of ambition; but, returning to the atoms, treats of the combination which
enables them to form and perpetuate the present variety of things. all
change is ultimately due to the primordial motion of the atoms. this
motion, naturally in a straight line, is occasionally deflected; and this
deflection accounts for the many variations from exact law. moreover,
atoms differ in form, some being rough, others smooth, some round, others
square, &c. they are combined in infinite ways, which combinations give
rise to the so-called secondary properties of matter, colour, heat, smell,
&c. innumerable other worlds besides our own exist; this one will probably
soon pass away; atoms and the void alone are eternal. in the third book
the poet attacks what he considers the stronghold of superstition. the
soul, mind, or vital principle is carefully discussed, and declared to be
material, being composed, indeed, of the finest atoms, as is shown by its
rapid movement, and the fact that it does not add to the weight of the
body, but in no wise _sui generis_, or differing in kind from other
matter. it is united with the body as the perfume with the incense, nor
can they be severed without destruction to both. they are born together,
grow together, and perish together. death therefore is the end of being,
and life beyond the grave is not only impossible but inconceivable. book
iv. treats of the images or idols cast off from the surface of bodies,
borne continually through space, and sometimes seen by sleepers in dreams,
or by sick people or others in waking visions. they are not illusions of
the senses; the illusion arises from the wrong interpretation we put upon
them. to these images the passion of love is traced; and with a brilliant
satire on the effects of yielding to it the book closes. the fifth book
examines the origin and formation of the solar system, which it treats not
as eternal after the manner of the stoics, but as having had a definite
beginning, and as being destined to a natural and inevitable decay. he
applies his principle of "fortuitous concurrence" to this part of his
subject with signal power, but the faultiness of his method interferes
with the effect of his argument. the finest part of the book, and perhaps
of the whole poem, is his account of the "origin of species," and the
progress of human society. his views read like a hazy forecast of the
evolution doctrine. he applies his principle with great strictness; no
break occurs; experience alone has been the guide of life. if we ask,
however, whether he had any idea of _progress_ as we understand it, we
must answer no. he did not believe in the perfectibility of man, or in the
ultimate prevalence of virtue in the world. the last book tries to show
the natural origin of the rarer and more gigantic physical phenomena,
thunderstorms, volcanoes, earthquakes, pestilence, &c. and terminates with
a long description of the plague of athens, in which we trace many
imitations of thucydides. this book is obviously unfinished; but the aim
of the work may be said to be so far complete that nowhere is the central
object lost sight of, viz., to expel the belief in divine interventions,
and to save mankind from all fear of the supernatural.

the value of the poem to us consists not in its contributions to science
but in its intensity of poetic feeling. none but a student will read
through the disquisitions on atoms and void. all who love poetry will feel
the charm of the digressions and introductions. these, which are
sufficiently numerous, are either resting-places in the process of proof,
when the writer pauses to reflect, or bursts of eloquent appeal which his
earnestness cannot repress. of the first kind are the account of spring in
book i. and the enumeration of female attractions in book iv.; of the
second, are the sacrifice of iphigenia, [68] the tribute to empedocles and
epicurus, [69] the description of himself as a solitary wanderer among
trackless haunts of the muses, [70] the attack on ambition and luxury,
[71] the pathetic description of the cow bereft of her calf, [72] the
indignant remonstrance with the man who fears to die. [73] in these, as in
innumerable single touches, the poet of original genius is revealed.
virgil often works by allusion: lucretius never does. all his effects are
gained by the direct presentation of a distinct image. he has in a high
degree the "seeing eye," which needs only a steady hand to body forth its
visions. take the picture of mars in love, yielding to venus's prayer for
peace. [74] what can be more truly statuesque?

      "belli fera moenera mavors
  armipotens regit, in gremium qui saepe tuum se
  reiicit aeterno devictus volnere amoris:
  atque ita suspiciens tereti cervice reposta
  pascit amore avidos inhians in te, dea, visus,
  eque tuo pendet resupini spiritus ore.
  hunc tu diva tuo recubantem corpore sancto
  circumfusa super suavis ex ore loquellas
  funde petens placidam romanis, incluta, pacem."

or, again, of nature's freedom:

  "libera continuo dominis privata superbis."

who can fail in this to catch the tones of the republic? again, take his
description of the transmission of existence,

  "et quasi cursores vitai; lampada tradunt;"

or of the helplessness of medicine in time of plague,

  "mussabat tacito medicina timore."

these are a few examples of a power present throughout, filling his
reasonings with a vivid reality far removed from the conventional rhetoric
of most philosopher poets. [75] his language is thucydidean in its
chiselled outline, its quarried strength, its living expressiveness. nor
is his moral earnestness inferior. the end of life is indeed nominally
pleasure, [76] "_dux vitae dia voluptas_;" but really it is a pure heart,
"_at bene non poterat sine puro pectore vivi_." [77] he who first showed
the way to this was the true deity. [78] the contemplation of eternal law
will produce, not as the strict epicureans say, _indifference_, [79] but
resignation. [80] this happiness is in our own power, and neither gods nor
men can take it away. the ties of family life are depicted with
enthusiasm, and though the active duties of a citizen are not recommended,
they are certainly not discouraged. but the knowledge of nature alone can
satisfy man's spirit, or enable him to lead a life worthy of the
immortals, and see with his mind's eye their mansions of eternal rest.
[81] nothing can be further from the light treatment of deep problems
current among epicureans than the solemn earnestness of lucretius. he
cannot leave the world to its vanity and enjoy himself. he seeks to bring
men to his views, but at the same time he sees how hopeless is the task.
he becomes a pessimist: in roman language, _he despairs of the republic_.
he is a lonely spirit, religious even in his anti-religionism, full of
reverence, but ignorant what to worship; a splendid poet, feeding his
spirit on the husks of mechanical causation.

with regard to his language, there can be but one opinion. it is at times
harsh, at times redundant, at times prosaic; but at a time when "greek,
and often debased greek, had made fatal inroads into the national idiom,"
his latin has the purity of that of cicero or terence. like lucilius, he
introduces single greek words, [82] a practice which horace wisely
rejects, [83] but which is revived in the poetry of the empire. [84] his
poetical ornaments are those of the older writers. archaism, [85]
alliteration, [86] and assonance abound in his pages. these would not have
been regarded as defects by critics like cicero or varro; they are
instances of his determination to give way in nothing to the fashion of
the day.

his style [87] is fresh, strong, and impetuous, but frequently and
intentionally rugged. repetitions occasionally wearisome, and prosaic
constructions, occur. poetry is sacrificed to logic in the innumerable
particles of transition, [88] and in the painful precision which at times
leaves nothing to the imagination of the reader. but his vocabulary is not
prosaic; it is poetical to a degree exceeding that of all other latin
writers. it is to be regretted that he did not oftener allow himself to be
carried away by the stroke of the thyrsus, which impelled him to strive
for the meed of praise. [89]

he is not often mentioned in later literature. quintilian characterises
him as elegant but difficult; [90] ovid and statius warmly praise him;
[91] horace alludes to him as his own teacher in philosophy; [92] virgil,
though he never mentions his name, refers to him in a celebrated passage,
and shows in all his works traces of a profound study of, and admiration
for, his poetry. [93] ovid draws largely from him in the _metamorphoses_,
and manilius had evidently adopted him as a model. the writer of _etna_
echoes his language and sentiments, and tacitus, in a later generation,
speaks of critics who even preferred him to virgil. the irreligious
tendency of his work seems to have brought his name under a cloud; and
those who copied him may have thought it wiser not to acknowledge their
debt. the later empire and the middle ages remained indifferent to a poem
which sought to disturb belief; it was when the scepticism of the
eighteenth century broke forth that lucretius's power was first fully
felt. since the time of boyle he has commanded from some minds an almost
enthusiastic admiration. his spirit lives in shelley, though he has not
yet found a poet of kindred genius to translate him. but his great name
and the force with which he strikes chords to which every soul at times
vibrates must, now that he is once known, secure for him a high place
among the masters of thoughtful song.

transpadane gaul was at this time fertile in poets. besides two of the
first order it produced several of the second rank among these m. furius
bibaculus (103-29? b.c.) must be noticed. his exact date is uncertain, but
he is known to have lampooned both julius and augustus caesar, [94] and
perhaps lived to find himself the sole representative of the earlier race
of poets. [95] he is one of the few men of the period who attained to old
age. some have supposed that the line of horace [96]--

    "turgidus alpinus jugulat dum memnona,"

refers to him, the nickname of alpinus having been given him on account of
his ludicrous description of jove "spitting snow upon the alps." others
have assigned the eight spurious lines on lucilius in the tenth satire of
horace to him. macrobius preserves several verses from his _bellum
gallicum_, which virgil has not disdained to imitate, _e.g._

  "interea oceani linquens aurora cubile."

  "rumoresque serunt varios et multa requirunt."

  "confimat dictis simul atque exsuscitat acres
  ad bellandum animos reficitque ad praelia mentes." [97]

many of the critics of this period also wrote poems. among these was
valerius cato, sometimes called cato grammaticus, whose love elegies were
known to ovid. he also amused himself with short mythological pieces, none
of which have come down to us. two short poems called _dirae_ and _lydia_,
which used to be printed among virgil's _catalecta_, bear his name, but
are now generally regarded as spurious. they contain the bitter complaints
of one who was turned out of his estate by an intruding soldier, and his
resolution to find solace for all ills in the love of his faithful
mistress.

the absorbing interest of the war between caesar and pompey compelled all
classes to share its troubles; even the poets did not escape. they were
now very numerous. already the vain desire to write had become universal
among the _jeunesse_ of the capital. the seductive methods by which
alexandrinism had made it equally easy to enshrine in verse his morning
reading or his evening's amour, proved too great an attraction for the
young roman votary of the muses. rome already teemed with the class so
pitilessly satirized by horace and juvenal, the

  "saecli incommoda, pessimi poetae."

the first name of any celebrity is that of varro atacinus, a native of
gallia narbonensis. he was a varied and prolific writer, who cultivated
with some success at least three domains of poetry. in his younger days he
wrote satires, but without any aptitude for the work. [98] these he
deserted for the epos, in which he gained some credit by his poem on the
sequanian war. this was a national epic after the manner of ennius, but
from the silence of later poets we may conjecture that it did not retain
its popularity. at the age of thirty-five he began to study with diligence
the alexandrine models, and gained much credit by his translation of the
_argonautica_ of apollonius. ovid often mentions this poem with
admiration; he calls varro the poet of the sail-tossing sea, says no age
will be ignorant of his fame, and even thinks the ocean gods may have
helped him to compose his song. [99] quintilian with better judgment [100]
notes his deficiency both in originality and copiousness, but allows him
the merit of a careful translator. we gather from a passage of ovid [101]
that he wrote love poems, and from other sources that he translated greek
works on topography and meteorology, both strictly copied from the
alexandrines.

besides varro, we hear of ticidas, of memmius the friend of lucretius, of
c. helvius cinna, and c. licinius calvus, as writers of erotic poetry. the
last two were also eminent in other branches. cinna (50 b.c.), who is
mentioned by virgil as a poet superior to himself, [102] gained renown by
his _smyrna_, an epic based on the unnatural love of myrrha for her father
cinyras, [103] on which revolting subject he bestowed nine years [104] of
elaboration, tricking it out with every arid device that pedantry's long
list could supply. its learning, however, prevented it from being
neglected. until the _aeneid_ appeared, it was considered the fullest
repository of choice mythological lore. it was perhaps the nearest
approach ever made in rome to an original alexandrine poem. calvus (82-47
b.c.), who is generally coupled with catullus, was a distinguished orator
as well as poet. cicero pays him the compliment of honourable mention in
the _brutus_, [105] praising his parts and lamenting his early death. he
thinks his success would have been greater had he forgotten himself more.
this egotism was probably not wanting to his poetry, but much may be
excused him on account of his youth. it is difficult to form an opinion of
his style; the epithets, _gravis, vehemens, exilis_ (which apply rather to
his oratory than to his poetry), seem contradictory; the last strikes us
as the most discriminating. besides short elegies like those of catullus,
he wrote an epic called _io_, as well as lampoons against pompey and other
leading men. we possess none of his fragments.

from calvus we pass to catullus. this great poet was born at verona (87
b.c.), and died, according to jerome, in his thirty-first year; but this
is generally held to be an error, and prof. ellis fixes his death in 54
b.c. in either case he was a young man when he died, and this is an
important consideration in criticising his poems. he came as a youth to
rome, where he mixed freely in the best society, and where he continued to
reside, except when his health or fortunes made a change desirable. [106]
at such times he resorted either to sirmio, a picturesque spot on the lago
di garda, [107] where he had a villa, or else to his tiburtine estate,
which, he tells us, he mortgaged to meet certain pecuniary embarrassments.
[108] among his friends were nepos, who first acknowledged his genius,
[109] to whom the grateful poet dedicated his book; cicero, whose
eloquence he warmly admired; [110] pollio, cornificius, cinna, and calvus,
besides many others less known to fame. like all warm natures, he was a
good hater. caesar and his friend mamurra felt his satire; [111] and
though he was afterwards reconciled to caesar, the reconciliation did not
go beyond a cold indifference. [112] to mamurra he was implacably hostile,
but satirised him under the fictitious name of mentula to avoid offending
caesar. his life was that of a thorough man of pleasure, who was also a
man of letters. indifferent to politics, he formed friendships and
enmities for personal reasons alone. two events in his life are important
for us, since they affected his genius--his love for lesbia, and his
brother's death. the former was the master-passion of his life. it began
in the fresh devotion of a first love; it survived the cruel shocks of
infidelity and indifference; and, though no longer as before united with
respect, it endured unextinguished to the end, burning with the passion of
despair.

who lesbia was, has been the subject of much discussion. there can be
little doubt that apuleius's information is correct, and that her real
name was clodia. if so, it is most natural to suppose her the same with
that abandoned woman, the sister of p. clodius pulcher, whom cicero brands
with infamy in his speech for caelius. unwillingness to associate the
graceful verse of catullus with a theme so unworthy has perhaps led the
critics to question without reason the identity. but the portrait drawn by
the poet when at length his eyes were opened, answers but too truly to
that of the orator. few things in all literature are sadder than the
spectacle of this trusting and generous spirit withered by the unkindness,
as it had been soiled by the favours, of this evil beauty. [113] the life
which began in rapturous devotion ends in hopeless gloom. the poet whose
every nerve was strung to the delights of an unselfish though guilty
passion, now that the spell is broken, finds life a burden, and confronts
with relief the thought of death which, as he anticipated, soon came to
end his sorrows.

the affection of catullus for his only brother, lost to him by an early
death, forms the counterpoise to his love for lesbia. where this brings
remorse, the other brings a soothing melancholy; the memory of this sacred
sorrow struggles to cast out the harassing regrets that torment his soul.
[114] nothing can surpass the simple pathos with which he alludes to this
event. it is the subject of one short elegy, [115] and enters largely into
another. when travelling with the pro-praetor memmius into bithynia, he
visited his brother's tomb at rhoeteum in the troad. it was on his return
from this journey, undertaken, but without success, in the hope of
bettering his fortune, that he wrote the little poem to sirmio, [116]
which dwells on the associations of home with a sweetness perhaps
unequalled in ancient poetry. [117]

in this, and indeed in all his shorter pieces, his character is
unmistakably revealed. no writer, ancient or modern, is more frank than
he. he neither hides his own faults, nor desires his friends to hide
theirs from him; [118] his verses are the honest spontaneous expression of
his every-day life. in them we see a youth, ardent, unaffected, impulsive,
generous, courteous, and outspoken, but indifferent to the serious
interests of life; recklessly self-indulgent, plunging into the grossest
sensuality, and that with so little sense of guilt as to appeal to heaven
as witness of the purity of his life: [119] we see a poet, full of
delicate fooling and of love for the beautiful, with a strong lyrical
impulse fresh as that of greece, and an appreciation of greek feeling that
makes him revive the very inspiration of greek genius; [120] with a chaste
simplicity of style that faithfully reflects every mood, and with an
amount of learning which, if inconsiderable as compared with that of the
augustan poets, much exceeded that of his chief predecessors, and secured
for him the honourable epithet of the learned (_doctus_). [121]

the poems of catullus fall naturally into three divisions, doubtless made
by the poet himself. these are the short lyrical pieces in various metres,
containing the best known of those to lesbia, besides others to his most
intimate friends; then come the longer poems, mostly in heroic or elegiac
metre, representing the higher flights of his genius; and lastly, the
epigrams on divers subjects, all in the elegiac metre, of which both the
list and the text are imperfect. in all we meet with the same careless
grace and simplicity both of thought and diction, but all do not show the
same artistic skill. the judgment that led catullus to place his lyric
poems in the foreground was right. they are the best known, the best
finished, and the most popular of all his compositions; the four to
lesbia, the one to sirmio, and that on acme and septimus, are perhaps the
most perfect lyrics in the latin language; and others are scarcely
inferior to them in elegance. the hendecasyllabic rhythm, in which the
greater part are written, is the one best suited to display the poet's
special gifts. of this metre he is the first and only master. horace does
not employ it; and neither martial nor statius avoids monotony in the use
of it. the freedom of cadence, the varied caesura, and the licences in the
first foot, [122] give the charm of irregular beauty, so sweet in itself
and so rare in latin poetry; and the rhythm lends itself with equal ease
to playful humour, fierce satire, and tender affection. other measures,
used with more or less success, are the iambic scazon, [123] the
chorianibic, the glyconic, and the sapphic, all probably introduced from
the greek by catullus. of these the sapphic is the least perfected. if the
eleventh and fifty-first odes be compared with the sapphic odes of horace,
the great metrical superiority of the latter will at once appear. catullus
copies the greek rhythm in its details without asking whether these are in
accordance with the genius of the latin language. horace, by adopting
stricter rules, produces a much more harmonious effect. the same is true
of catullus's treatment of the elegiac, as compared with that of
propertius or ovid. the greek elegiac does not require any stop at the end
of the couplet, nor does it affect any special ending; words of seven
syllables or less are used by it indifferently. the trisyllabic ending,
which is all but unknown to ovid, occurs continually in catullus; even the
monosyllabic, which is altogether avoided by succeeding poets, occurs
once. [124] another licence, still more alien from roman usage, is the
retention of a short or unelided syllable at the end of the first
penthemimer. [125] catullus's elegiac belongs to the class of half-adapted
importations, beautiful in its way, but rather because it recalls the
exquisite cadences of the greek than as being in itself a finished
artistic product.

the six long poems are of unequal merit. the modern reader will not find
much to interest him in the _coma berenices_, abounding as it does in
mythological allusions. [126] the poem to mallius or allius, [127] written
at verona, is partly mythological, partly personal, and though somewhat
desultory, contains many fine passages. catullus pleads his want of books
as an excuse for a poor poem, implying that a full library was his usual
resort for composition. this poem was written shortly after his brother's
death, which throws a vein of melancholy into the thought. in it, and
still more happily in his two _epithalamia_, [128] he paints with deep
feeling the joys of wedded love. the former of these, which celebrates the
marriage of manlius torquatus, is the loveliest product of his genius. it
is marred by a few gross allusions, but they are not enough to interfere
with its general effect. it rings throughout with joyous exultation, and
on the whole is innocent as well as full of warm feeling. it is all
movement; the scene opens before us; the marriage god wreathed with
flowers and holding the _flammeum_, or nuptial veil, leads the dance; then
the doors open, and amid waving torches the bride, blushing like the
purple hyacinth, enters with downcast mien, her friends comforting her;
the bridegroom stands by and throws nuts to the assembled guests; light
railleries are banded to and fro; meanwhile the bride is lifted over the
threshold, and sinks on the nuptial couch, _alba parthenice velut,
luteumve papaver_. the different sketches of _auruneuleia_ as the loving
bride, the chaste matron, and the aged grandame nodding kindly to
everybody, please from their unadorned simplicity as well as from their
innate beauty.

the second of these _epithalamia_ is, if not translated, certainly
modelled from the greek, and in its imagery reminds us of sappho. it is
less ardent and more studied than the first, and though its tone is far
less elevated, it gains a special charm from its calm, almost statuesque
language. [129] the _nuptials of peleus and thetis_ is a miniature epic,
[130] such as were often written by the alexandrian poets. short as it is,
it contains two plots, one within the other. the story of peleus's
marriage is made the occasion for describing the scene embroidered on the
coverlet or cushion of the marriage bed. this contains the loves of
theseus and ariadne, the minotaur, the labyrinth, the return of theseus,
his desertion of ariadne, and her reception into the stars by iacchus. the
poem is unequal in execution; the finest passages are the lament of
ariadne, which virgil has imitated in that of dido, and the song of the
fates, which gives the first instances of those refrains taken from the
greek pastoral, which please so much in the eclogues, and in tennyson's
_may queen._ the _atys_ or _attis_ stands alone among the poet's works.
its subject is the self-mutilation of a noble youth out of zeal for
cybele's worship, and is probably a study from the greek, though of what
period it would be hard to say. a theme so unnatural would have found
little favour with the attic poets; the subject is more likely to have
been approached by the alexandrian writers, whom catullus often copies.
but these tame and pedantic versifiers could have given no precedent for
the wild inspiration of this strange poem, which clothes in the music of
finished art bursts of savage emotion. the metre is galliambic, a rhythm
proper to the hymns of cybele, but of which no primitive greek example
remains. the poem cannot be perused with pleasure, but must excite
astonishment at the power it displays. the language is tinged with
archaisms, especially compounds like _hederigera, silvicultrix_. in
general catullus writes in the plain unaffected language of daily life.
his effects are produced by the freshness rather than the choiceness of
his terms, and by his truth to nature and good taste. his construction of
sentences, like that of lucretius, becomes at times prosaic, from the
effort to avoid all ambiguity. if the first forty lines of his _epistle to
mallius_ [131] be studied and compared with any of ovid's _epistles from
pontus_, the great difference in this respect will at once be seen. later
writers leave most of the particles of transition to be supplied by the
reader's intelligence: catullus, like sophocles, indicates the sequence of
thought. nevertheless poetry lost more than it gained by the want of
grammatical connection between successive passages, which, while it adds
point, detracts from clearness, and makes the interpretation, for example,
of persius and juvenal very much less satisfactory than that of lucretius
or horace.

the genius of catullus met with early recognition. cornelius nepos, in his
life of atticus (ch. xii.), couples him with lucretius as the first poet
of the age (_nostra aetas_), and his popularity, though obscured during
the augustan period, soon revived, and remained undiminished until the
close of latin literature. during the middle ages catullus was nearly
being lost to us; he is preserved in but one manuscript discovered in the
fourteenth century. [132]

catullus is the last of the republican poets. separated by but a few years
from the _eclogues_ of virgil, a totally different spirit pervades the
works of the two writers; while catullus is free, unblushing, and
fearless, owing allegiance to no man, virgil is already guarded,
restrained, and diffident of himself, trusting to pollio or augustus to
perfect his muse, and guide it to its proper sphere. in point of language
the two periods show no break: in point of feeling they are altogether
different. a few survived from the one into the other, but as a rule they
relapsed into silence, or indulged merely in declamation. we feel that
catullus was fortunate in dying before the battle of aetium; had he lived
into the augustan age, it is difficult to see how he could have found a
place there. he is a fitting close to this passionate and stormy period, a
youth in whom all its qualities for good and evil have their fullest
embodiment.


appendix.

note i.--_on the use of alliteration in latin poetry._

it is impossible to read the earlier latin poets, or even virgil, without
seeing that they abound in repetitions of the same letter or sound, either
intentionally introduced or unconsciously presenting themselves owing to
constant habit. alliteration and assonance are the natural ornaments of
poetry in a rude age. in anglo-saxon literature alliteration is one of the
chief ways of distinguishing poetry from prose. but when a strict prosody
is formed, it is no longer needed. thus in almost all civilised poetry, it
has been discarded, except as an occasional and appropriate ornament for a
special purpose. greek poetry gives few instances. the art of homer has
long passed the stage at which such an aid to effect is sought for. the
cadence of the greek hexameter would be marred by so inartistic a device.
the dramatists resort to it now and then, _e.g._ oedipus, in his blind
rage, thus taunts tiresias:

  _tuphlos ta t' ota ton te noun ta t' ommat' ei._

but here the alliteration is as true to nature as it is artistically
effective. for it is known that violent emotion irresistibly compels us to
heap together similar sounds. several subtle and probably unconscious
instances of it are given by peile from the idyllic poets; but as a rule
it is true of greek as it is of english, french, and italian poetry, that
when metre, caesura, or rhyme, hold sway, alliteration plays an altogether
subordinate part. it is otherwise in latin poetry. here, owing to the
fondness for all that is old, alliteration is retained in what is
correspondingly a much later period of growth. after virgil, indeed, it
almost disappears, but as used by him it is such an instrument for effect,
that perhaps the discontinuance of it was a loss rather than a gain. it is
employed in latin poetry for various purposes. plautus makes it
subservient to comic effect (capt. 903, quoted by munro.).

  "_quanta pernis pestis veniet, quanta labes larido,
  quanta sumini absumedo, quanta callo calamitas
  quanta lanies lassitudo_."

compare our verse:

  "right round the rugged rock the ragged rascal ran."

ennius and the tragedians make it express the stronger emotions, as
violence:

  "_priamo vi vitam evitari._"

so virgil, imitating him: _fit via vi_; lucr. _vivida vis animi pervicit_;
or again pity, which is expressed by the same letter (pronounced as w),
_e.g. neu patriae validas in viscera vertite vires; viva videns vivo
sepeliri viscera, busto_, from virgil and lucr. respectively. a hard
letter expresses difficulty or effort, _e.g. manibus magnos divellere
montis_. so pope: _up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone_. or
emphasis, _parare non potuit pedibus qui pontum per vada possent_, from
lucretius; _multaque_ prae_terea vatum_ prae_di ta_ pri_orum_, from
virgil. rarely it has no special appropriateness, or is a mere display of
ingenuity, as: _o tite tute tati tibi tanta tyranne tulisti_ (ennius).
assonance is almost equally common, and is even more strange to our taste.
in greek, hebrew, and many languages, it occurs in the form of
_paronomasia_, or play on words; but this presupposes a _rapport_ between
the name and what is implied by it. assonance in latin poetry has no such
relevance. it simply emphasizes or adorns, _e.g_. aug_usto_ aug_urio
postquam incluta condita roma est_ (enn.); _pulcram pulcritudinem_
(plaut.). it takes divers forms, _e.g._ the _omoioteleuton_ akin to our
rhyme. _vincla recus_antum _et sera sub nocte rud_entum; _cornua
relat_arum _obvertimus antenn_arum._ the beginnings of rhyme are here
seen, and perhaps still more in the elegiac, _debuerant fusos evoluisse
meos_; or sapphic, _pone me pigris ubi nulla campis arbor aestiva
recreatur aura._ other varieties of assonance are the frequent employment
of the same preposition in the same part of the foot, _e.g. insontem,
infando indicio--disjectis disque supatis_; the mere repetition of the
same word, _lacerum crudeliter ora, ora manusque_; or of a different
inflexion of it, _omnis feret omnia tellus, non omnia possumus omnes_;
most of all, by employing several words of a somewhat similar sound, what
is in fact a jingle, _e.g._ the well-known line, cedant _arma togae
con_cedat lau_rea_ lau_di_; or again, mente _cle_mente _edita_ (laberius).
instances of this are endless; and in estimating the mechanical structure
of latin poetry, which is the chief side of it, we observe the care with
which the greatest artists retain every method of producing effect, even
if somewhat old fashioned (see on this subject munro's lucr. preface to
notes ii. which has often been referred to.)


note ii.--_some additional details on the history of the mimus_ (from
woelfflin. _publ. syri sententiae_, lips. 1869).

the mime at first differed from other kinds of comedy--(1) in having no
proper plot; (2) in not being presented primarily on the stage; (3) in
having but one actor. eudicos imitated the gestures of boxing; theodorus
the creaking of a windlass; parmeno did the grunting of a pig to
perfection. any one who raised a laugh by such kinds if imitation was
properly said _mimum agere_. mimes are thus defined by diomedes (p. 491,
13 k), _sermones cuiuslibet et molus sine reverentia vel factorum et
dictorum turpium cum lascivia imitatio_. such mimes as these were often
held at banquets for the amusement of great men. sulla was passionately
fond of them. admitted to the stage, they naturally took the place of
interludes or afterpieces. when a man imitated _e.g._ a muleteer (petr.
sat. 68), he had his mule with him; or if he imitated a _causidicus_, or a
drunken ruffian (ath. 14, 621, c.), some other person was by to play the
foil to his violence. thus arose the distinction of parts and dialogue;
the chief actor was called _archimimus_, and the mime was then developed
after the example of the atellanae. when several actors took part in a
piece, each was said _mimum agere_, though this phrase originally applied
only to the single actor.

when the mime first came on the stage, it was acted in front of the
curtain (fest. p. 326, _ed. mull._), afterwards, as its proportions
increased, a new kind of curtain called _siparium_ was introduced, so that
while the mime was being performed on this new and enlarged _proscaenium_
the regular drama were going on behind the siparium. pliny (xxxv. 199)
calls syrus _mimicae scaenae conditorem_; and as he certainly did not
build a theatre, it is most probable that pliny refers to his invention of
the siparium. he evidently had a natural genius for this kind of
representation, in which macrobius (ii. 7. 6) and quintilian allow him the
highest place. laberius appears to have been a more careful writer. syrus
was not a literary man, but an improvisator and moralist. his _sententiae_
were held in great honour in the rhetorical schools in the time of
augustus, and are quoted by the elder seneca (contr. 206, 4). the younger
seneca also frequently quotes them in his letters (ep. 108, 8, &c.), and
often imitates their style. there are some interesting lines in petronius
(satir. 55), which are almost certainly from syrus. being little known,
they are worth quoting as a popular denunciation of luxury--

  "luxuriae rictu martis marcent moenia,
  tuo palato clausus pavo pascitur
  plumato amictus aureo babylonico;
  gallina tibi numidica, tibi gallus spado:
  ciconia etiam grata peregrina hospita
  pietaticultrix gracilipes crotalistria
  avis, exul hiemis, titulus tepidi temporis
  nequitiae nidum in cacabo fecit modo.
  quo margarita cara tribaca indica?
  an ut matrona ornata phaleris pelagiis
  tollat pedes indomita in strato extraneo?
  zmaragdum ad quam rem viridem, pretiosum vitrum.
  quo carchedonios optas ignes lnpideos
  nisi ut scintilles? _probitas est carbunculus_."

there is a rude but unmistakable vigour in these lines which, when
compared with the quotation from laberius given in the text of the work,
cause us to think very highly of the mime as patronized by caesar.


note iii.--_fragments of valerius soranus_.

this writer, who was somewhat earlier than the present epoch, having been
a contemporary of sulla but having outlived him, was noted for his great
learning. he is mentioned by pliny as the first to prefix a table of
contents to his book. his native town, sora, was well known for its
activity in liberal studies. he is said by plutarch to have announced
publicly the secret name of rome or of her tutelary deity, for which the
gods punished him by death. st. augustine (c. d. vii. 9) quotes two
interesting hexameters as from him:

  "iupiter omnipotens, rerum rex ipse deusque
  progenitor genetrixque, deum deus, unus et omnes."

servius (aen. iv. 638) cites two verses of a similar character, which
are most probably from soranus. iupiter, addressing the gods, says,

  "caelicolae, mea membra, dei, quos nostra potestas
  officiis, diversa facit."

these fragments show an extraordinary power of condensed expression, as
well as a clear grasp on the unity of the supreme being, for which reason
they are quoted.




part ii.

_the augustan epoch_ (42 b.c.-14 a.d.).


chapter i.

general characteristics.


the augustan age in its strictest sense does not begin until after the
battle of actium, when augustus, having overthrown his competitor, found
himself in undisputed possession of the roman world (31 b.c.). but as the
_eclogues_, and many of horace's poems, were written at an earlier date,
and none of these can be ranked with the republican literature, it is best
to assign the commencement of the augustan period to the year of the
battle of philippi, when the defeat of brutus and cassius left the old
constitution without a champion and made monarchy in the person either of
antonius or octavius inevitable. this period of fifty-seven years,
extending to the death of augustus, comprises a long list of splendid
writers, inferior to those of the ciceronian age in vigour and boldness,
but superior to all but cicero himself in finish and artistic skill as
well as in breadth of human sympathy and suggestive beauty of expression.
it marks the culmination of latin poetry, as the last epoch marks the
perfection of latin prose. but the bloom which had been so long expanding
was short-lived in proportion to its sweetness; and perfect as is the art
of virgil, horace, and tibullus, within a few years of horace's death both
style and thought had entered on the path of irretrievable decline. the
muse of ovid, captivating and brilliant, has already lost the severe grace
that stamps the highest classic verse; and the false tendencies forgiven
in him from admiration for his talent, become painfully conspicuous in his
younger contemporaries. livy, too, in the domain of history, shows traces
of that poetical colouring which began more and more to encroach on the
style of prose; while in the work of vitruvius, on the one hand and in
that of the elder seneca on the other, we observe two tendencies which
helped to accelerate decay; the one towards an entire absence of literary
finish, the other towards the substitution of rich decoration for chaste
ornament.

there are certain common features shared by the chief augustan authors
which distinguish them from those of the closing republic. while the
latter were men of birth and eminence in the state, the former were mostly
italians or provincials, [1] often of humble origin, neither warriors nor
statesmen, but peaceful, quiet natures, devoid of ambition, and desiring
only a modest independence and success in prosecuting their art. horace
had indeed fought for brutus; but he was no soldier, and alludes with
humorous irony to his flight from the field of battle. [2] virgil prays
that he may live without glory among the forests and streams he loves. [3]
tibullus [4] and propertius [5] assert in the strongest terms their
incapacity for an active career, praying for nothing more than enjoyment
of the pleasures of love and song. spirits like these would have had no
chance of rising to eminence amid the fierce contests of the republic.
gentle and diffident, they needed a patron to call out their powers or
protect their interests; and when, under the sway of augustus, such a
patron was found, the rich harvest of talent that arose showed how much
letters had hitherto suffered from the unsettled state of the times. [6]
it is true that several writers of the preceding period survived into
this. men like varro, who kept aloof from the city, nursing in retirement
a hopeless loyalty to the past; men like pollio and messala, who accepted
the monarchy without compromising their principles, and who still appeared
in public as orators or jurists; these, together with a few poets of the
older school, such as furius bibaculus, continued to write during the
first few years of the augustan epoch, but cannot properly be regarded as
belonging to it. [7] they pursued their own lines of thought, uninfluenced
by the empire, except in so far as it forced them to select more trivial
themes, or to use greater caution in expressing their thoughts. but the
great authors who are the true representatives of augustus's reign,
virgil, livy, and horace, were brought into direct contact with the
emperor, and much of their inspiration centres round his office and
person.

the conqueror of actium was welcomed by all classes with real or feigned
enthusiasm. to the remnant of the republican families, indeed, he was an
object partly of flattery, partly of hatred, in no case, probably, of
hearty approval or admiration; but by the literary class, as by the great
mass of the people, he was hailed as the restorer of peace and good
government, of order and religion, the patron of all that was best in
literature and art, the adopted son of that great man whose name was
already a mighty power, and whose spirit was believed to watch over rome
as one of her presiding deities. it is no wonder if his opening reign
stamped literature with new and imposing features, or if literature
expressed her sense of his protection by a constant appeal to his name.

augustus has been the most fortunate of despots, for he has met with
nothing but praise. a few harsh spirits, it seems, blamed him in no
measured terms; but he repaid them by a wise neglect, at least as long as
maecenas lived, who well knew, from temperament as well as experience, the
value of seasonable inactivity. as it is, all the authors that have come
to us are panegyrists. none seem to remember his early days; all centre
their thoughts on the success of the present and the promise of the
future. yet augustus himself could not forget those times. as chief of the
proscription, as the betrayer of cicero, as the suspected murderer of the
consul hirtius, as the pitiless destroyer of cleopatra's children, he must
have found it no easy task to act the mild ruler; as a man of profligate
conduct he must have found it still less easy to come forward as the
champion of decency and morals. he was assisted by the confidence which
all, weary of war and bloodshed, were willing to repose in him, even to an
unlimited extent. he was assisted also by able administrators, maecenas in
civil, and agrippa in military affairs. but there were other forces making
themselves felt in the great city. one of these was literature, as
represented by the literary class, consisting of men to whom letters were
a profession not a relaxation, and who now first appear prominently in
rome. augustus saw the immense advantage of enlisting these on his side.
he could pass laws through the senate; he could check vice by punishment;
but neither his character nor his history could make him influence the
heart of the people. to effect real reforms persuasive voice must be found
to preach them. and who so efficacious as the band of cultured poets whom
he saw collecting round him? these he deliberately set himself to win; and
that he did win then, some to a half-hearted, others to an absolute
allegiance, is one of the best testimonies to his enlightened policy. yet
he could hardly have effected his object had it not been for the able co-
operation of maecenas, whose conciliatory manners well fitted him to be
the friend of literary men. this astute minister formed a select circle of
gifted authors, chiefly poets, whom he endeavoured to animate with the
enthusiasm of succouring the state. he is said to have suggested to
augustus the necessity of restoring the decayed grandeur of the national
religion. the open disregard of morality and religion evinced by the
ambitious party-leaders during the civil wars had brought the public
worship into contempt and the temples into ruin. augustus determined that
civil order should once more repose upon that reverence for the gods which
had made rome great. [8] accordingly, he repaired or rebuilt many temples,
and both by precept and example strove to restore the traditional respect
for divine things. but he must have experienced a grave difficulty in the
utter absence of religious conviction which had become general in rome.
the authors of the _de divinatione_ and the _de rerum natura_ could not
have written as they did, without influencing many minds. and if men so
admirable as cicero and lucretius denied, the one the possibility of the
science he professed, [9] the other the doctrine of providence on which
all religion rests, it was little likely that ordinary minds should retain
much belief in such things. augustus was relieved from this strait by the
appearance of a new literary class in rome, young authors from the country
districts, with simpler views of life and more enthusiasm, of whom some at
least might be willing to consecrate their talents to furthering the
sacred interests on which social order depends. the author who fully
responded to his appeal, and probably exceeded his highest hopes, was
virgil; but horace, livy, and propertius, showed themselves not unwilling
to espouse the same cause. never was power more ably seconded by
persuasion; the laws of augustus and the writings of virgil, horace, and
livy, in order to be fully appreciated, must be considered in their
connection, political and religious, with each other.

the emperor, his minister, and his advocates, thus working for the same
end, beyond doubt produced some effect. the _odes_ of horace in the first
three books, which are devoted to politics, show an attitude of antagonism
and severe expostulation; he boldly rebukes vice, and calls upon the
strong hand to punish it:

    "quid tristes querimoniae,
  si non supplicio culpa reciditur?
    quid leges sine moribus
  vanae proficiunt?" [10]

but when, some years later, he wrote the _carmen saeculare_, and the
fourth book of the odes, his voice is raised in a paean of unmixed
triumph. "the pure home is polluted by no unchastity; law and morality
have destroyed crime; matrons are blessed with children resembling their
fathers; already faith and peace, honour and maiden modesty, have returned
to us," &c. [11] this can hardly be mere exaggeration, though no doubt the
picture is coloured, since the popularity of ovid's _art of love_, even
during horace's lifetime, is a sufficient proof that profligacy did not
lack its votaries.

to the student of human development the most interesting feature in this
attempted reform of manners is the universal tendency to connect it with
the deification of the emperor. it was in vain that augustus claimed to
return to the old paths; everywhere he met this new apotheosis of himself
crowning the restored edifice of belief; so impossible was it for him, as
for others, to reconstruct the past. as the guardian of the people's
material welfare, he became, despite of himself, the people's chief
divinity. from the time that virgil's gratitude expressed itself in the
first eclogue--

  "namque erit ille mihi semper deus: illius aram
  saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus," [12]

the emperor was marked out for this new form of adulation, and succeeding
poets only added to what virgil had begun. even in his _epistles_, where
the conventionalities of mythology are never employed, horace compares him
with the greatest deities, and declares that altars are raised to his
name, while all confess him to be the greatest person that has been or
will be among mankind. [13] propertius and ovid [14] accept this language
as proper and natural, and the striking rapidity with which it established
itself in universal use is one of the most speaking signs of the growing
degeneracy. augustus himself was not cajoled, tiberius still less, but
caius and his successors were; even vespasian, when dying, in jest or
earnest used the words "ut puto deus fio." as the satirist says, "power
will believe anything that flattery suggests." [15]

side by side with this religious cultus of the emperor was a willingness
to surrender all political power into his hands. little by little he
engrossed all the offices of state, and so completely had proscription and
indulgence in turn done their work that none were found bold enough to
resist these insidious encroachments. [16] the privileges of the senate
and the rights of the people were gradually abridged; and that pernicious
policy so congenial to a despotism, of satisfying the appetite for food
and amusement and so keeping the people quiet, was inaugurated early in
his reign, and set moving in the lines which it long afterwards followed.
freedom of debate, which had been universal in the senate, was curtailed
by the knowledge that, as often as not, the business was being decided by
a secret council held within the palace. eloquence could not waste itself
in abstract discussions; and even if it attempted to speak, the growing
servility made it perilous to utter plain truths. thus the sphere of
public speaking was greatly restricted. those who had poured forth before
the assembled people the torrents of their oratory were now by what
tacitus so graphically calls the _pacification_ of eloquence [17] confined
to the tamer arena of the civil law courts. all those who felt that
without a practical object eloquence cannot exist, had to resign
themselves to silence. others less serious-minded found a sphere for their
natural gift of speech in the halls of the rhetoricians. it is pitiable to
see men like pollio content to give up all higher aims, and for want of
healthier exercise waste their powers in noisy declamation.

history, if treated with dignity and candour, was almost as dangerous a
field as eloquence. hence we find that few were bold enough to cultivate
it. livy, indeed, succeeded in producing a great masterwork, which, while
it did not conceal his pompeian sympathies, entered so heartily into the
emperor's general point of view as to receive high praise at his hands.
but livy was not a politician. those who had been politicians found it
unwise to provoke the jealousy of augustus by expressing their sentiments.
hence neither messala nor pollio continued their works on contemporary
history; a deprivation which we cannot but strongly feel, as we have few
trustworthy accounts of those, times.

in law augustus trenched less on the independent thought of the jurists,
but at the same time was better able to put forth his prerogative when
occasion was really needed. his method of accrediting the _responsa
prudentum_, by permitting only those who had his authorisation to exercise
that profession, was an able stroke of policy. [18] it gave the profession
as it were the safeguard of a diploma, and veiled an act of despotic power
under the form of a greater respect for law. the science of jurisprudence
was ably represented by various professors, but it became more and more
involved and difficult, and frequently draws forth from the satirists
abuse of its quibbling intricacies.

poetry was the form of literature to which most favour was shown, and
which flourished more vigorously than any other. the pastoral, and the
metrical epistle, were now first introduced. the former was based on the
theocritean idyll, but does not seem to have been well adapted to roman
treatment; the latter was of two kinds; it was either a real communication
on some subject of mutual interest, as that of horace, or else an
imaginary expression of feeling put into the mouth of a mythical hero or
heroine, of which the most brilliant examples are those of ovid.
philosophy and science flourished to a considerable extent. the desire to
find some compensation for the loss of all outward activity led many to
strive after the ideal of conduct presented by stoicism: and nearly all
earnest minds were more or less affected by this great system. livy is
reported to have been an eloquent expounder of philosophical doctrines,
and most of the poets show a strong leaning to its study. augustus wrote
_adhortationes_, and beyond doubt his example was often followed. the
speculative and therefore inoffensive topics of natural science were
neither encouraged nor neglected by augustus; vitruvius, the architect,
having showed some capacity for engineering, was kindly received by him,
but his treatise, admirable as it is, does not seem to have secured him
any special favour. it was such writers as he thought might be made
instruments of his policy that augustus set himself specially to encourage
by every means in his power. the result of this patronage was an
increasing divergence from the popular taste on the part of the poets, who
now aspired only to please the great and learned. [19] it is pleasing,
however, to observe the entire absence of ill-feeling that reigned in this
society of _beaux esprits_ with regard to one another. each held his own
special position, but all were equally welcome at the great man's
reunions, equally acceptable to one another; and each criticised the
other's works with the freedom of a literary freemasonry. [20] this select
cultivation of poetry reacted unfavourably on the thought and imagination,
though it greatly elevated the style of those that employed it. the
extreme delicacy of the artistic product shows it to have been due to some
extent to careful nursing, and its almost immediate collapse confirms this
conclusion.

while augustus, through maecenas, united men eminent for taste and culture
in a literary coterie, messala, who had never joined the successful side,
had a similar but smaller following, among whom was numbered the poet
tibullus. at the tables of these great men met on terms of equal
companionship their own friends and the authors whom they favoured or
assisted. for though the provincial poet could not, like those of the last
age, assume the air of one who owned no superior, but was bound by ties of
obligation as well as gratitude to his patron, still the works of horace
and virgil abundantly prove that servile compliment was neither expected
by him nor would have been given by them, as it was too frequently in the
later period to the lasting injury of literature as well as of character.
the great patrons were themselves men of letters. augustus was a severe
critic of style, and, when he wrote or spoke, did not fall below the high
standard he exacted from others. suetonius and tacitus bear witness to the
clearness and dignity of his public speaking. [21]

maecenas, as we shall notice immediately, was, or affected to be, a writer
of some pretension; and messala's eloquence was of so high an order, that
had he been allowed the opportunity of freely using it, he would beyond
doubt have been numbered among the great orators of rome.

such was the state of thought and politics which surrounded and brought
out the celebrated writers whom we shall now proceed to criticise, a task
the more delightful, as these writers are household words, and their best
works familiar from childhood to all who have been educated to love the
beautiful in literature.

the excellent literary judgment shown by augustus contributed to encourage
a high standard of taste among the rival authors. how weighty the
sovereign's influence was may be gathered from the extravagancies into
which the neronian and flavian authors fell through anxiety to please
monarchs of corrupt taste. the advantages of patronage to literature are
immense; but it is indispensable that the patron should himself be great.
the people were now so totally without literary culture that a popular
poet would necessarily have been a bad poet; careful writers turned from
them to the few who could appreciate what was excellent. yet maecenas, so
judicious as a patron, fell as an author into the very faults he blamed.
during the years he held office (30-8 b.c.) he devoted some fragments of
his busy days to composing in prose and verse writings which augustus
spoke of as "_murobrecheis cincinni_," "curled locks reeking with
ointment." we hear of a treatise called _prometheus_, certain dialogues,
among them a _symposium_, in which messala, virgil, and horace were
introduced; and horace implies that he had planned a prose history of
augustus's wars. [22] he did not shrink from attempting, and what was
worse, publishing, poetry, which bore imprinted on it the characteristics
of his effeminate mind. seneca quotes one passage [23] from which we may
form an estimate of his level as a versifier. but, however feeble in
execution, he was a skilful adviser of others. the wisdom of his counsels
to augustus is known; those he offered to virgil were equally sound. it
was he who suggested the plan of the _georgics_, and the poet acknowledges
his debt for a great idea in the words "_nil altum sine te meas inchoat_."
he was at once cautious and liberal in bestowing his friendship. the
length of time that elapsed between his first reception of horace and his
final enrolment of the poet among his intimates, shows that he was not
hasty in awarding patronage. and the difficulty which propertius
encountered in gaining a footing among his circle proves that even great
talent was not by itself a sufficient claim on his regard. as we shall
have occasion to mention him again, we shall pass him over here, and
conclude the chapter with a short account of the earliest augustan poet
whose name has come to us, l. varius rufus (64 b.c.-9 a.d.), the friend of
virgil, who introduced both him and horace to maecenas's notice, and who
was for some years accounted the chief epic poet of rome. [24]

born in cisalpine gaul, varius was, like all his countrymen, warmly
attached to caesar's cause, and seems to have made his reputation by an
epic on caesar's death. [25] of this poem we have scattered notices
implying that it was held in high esteem, and a fragment is preserved by
macrobius, [26] which it is worth while to quote:

  "ceu canis umbrosam lustrans gortynia vallem,
  si veteris potuit cervae comprendere lustra,
  saevit in absentem, et circum vestigia lustrans
  aethera per nitidum tenues sectatur odores;
  non amnes illam medii non ardua tentant,
  perdita nec serae meminit decedere nocti."

the rhythm here is midway between lucretius and virgil; the inartistic
repetition of _lustrans_ together with the use immediately before of the
cognate word _lustra_ point to a certain carelessness in composition; the
employment of epithets is less delicate than in horace and virgil; the
last line is familiar from its introduction unaltered, except by an
improved punctuation, into the _eclogues_. [27] two fine verses, slightly
modified in expression but not in rhythm, have found their way into the
_aeneid_. [28]

  "vendidit hic latium populis, agrosque quiritum
  eripuit: fixit leges pretio atque refixit."

besides this poem he wrote another on the praises of augustus, for which
horace testifies his fitness while excusing himself from approaching the
same subject. [29] from this were taken two lines [30] appropriated by
horace, and instanced as models of graceful flattery:

  "tene magis salvum populus velit, an populum tu,
  servet in ambiguum qui consulit et tibi et urbi,
  iupiter."

after the pre-eminence of virgil began to be recognised, varius seems to
have deserted epic poetry and turned his attention to tragedy, and that
with so much success, that his great work, the _thyestes_, was that on
which his fame with posterity chiefly rested. this drama, considered by
quintilian [31.] equal to any of the greek masterpieces, was performed at
the games after the battle of actium; but it was probably better adapted
for declaiming than acting. its high reputation makes its loss a serious
one--not for its intrinsic value, but for its position in the history of
literature as the first of those rhetorical dramas of which we possess
examples in those of seneca, and which, with certain modifications, have
been cultivated in our own century with so much spirit by byron, shelley,
and swinburne. the main interest which varius has for us arises from his
having, in company with plotius tucca, edited the aeneid after virgil's
death. the intimate friendship that existed between the two poets enabled
varius to give to the world many particulars as to virgil's character and
habits of life; this biographical sketch, which formed probably an
introduction to the volume, is referred to by quintilian [32] and others.

a poet of inferior note, but perhaps handed down to unenviable immortality
in the line of virgil--

  "argutos inter strepere anser olores," [33]

was anser. he was a partisan of antony, and from this fact, together with
the possible allusion in the _eclogues_, later grammarians discovered that
he was, like bavius and maevius, unhappy bards only known from the
contemptuous allusions of their betters, [34] an _obtrectator virgilii_.
as such he of course called down the vials of their wrath. but there is no
real evidence for the charge. he seems to have been an unambitious poet,
who indulged light and wanton themes. [35] aemilius macer, of verona, who
died 16 b.c., was certainly a friend of virgil, and has been supposed to
be the mopsus of the _eclogues_. he devoted his very moderate talents to
minute and technical didactic poems. the _ornithogonias_ of nicander was
imitated or translated by him, as well as the _thaeriaka_ of the same
writer. ovid mentions having been frequently present at the poet's
recitations, but as he does not praise them, [36] we may infer that macer
had no great name among his contemporaries, but owed his consideration and
perhaps his literary impulse to his friendship for virgil.




chapter ii.

virgil (70-19 b.c.).


publius virgilius, or more correctly, vergilius [1] maro, was born in the
village or district [2] of andes, near mantua, sixteen years after the
birth of catullus, of whom he was a compatriot as well as an admirer. [3]
as the citizenship was not conferred on gallia transpadana, of which
mantua was a chief town, until 49 b.c., when virgil was nearly twenty-one
years old, he had no claim by birth to the name of roman. and yet so
intense is the patriotism which animates his poems, that no other roman
writer, patrician or plebeian, surpasses or even equals it in depth of
feeling. it is one proof out of many how completely the power of rome
satisfied the desire of the italians for a great common head whom they
might reverence as the heaven-appointed representative of their race. and
it leads us to reflect on the narrow pride of the great city in not
earlier extending her full franchise to all those gallant tribes who
fought so well for her, and who at last extorted their demand with
grievous loss to themselves as to her, by the harsh argument of the sword.
to return to virgil. we learn nothing from his own works as to his early
life and parentage. our chief authority is donatus. his father, maro, was
in humble circumstances; according to some he followed the trade of a
potter. but as he farmed his own little estate, he must have been far
removed from indigence, and we know that he was able to give his
illustrious son the best education the time afforded. trained in the
simple virtues of the country, virgil, like horace, never lost his
admiration for the stern and almost spartan ideal of life which he had
there witnessed, and which the levity of the capital only placed in
stronger relief. after attending school for some years at cremona, he
assumed at sixteen the manly gown, on the very day to which tradition
assigns the death of the poet lucretius. some time later (53 b.c.), we
find him at rome studying rhetoric under epidius, and soon afterwards
philosophy under siro the epicurean. the recent publication of lucretius's
poem must have invested siro's teaching with new attractiveness in the
eyes of a young author, conscious of genius, but as yet self-distrustful,
and willing to humble his mind before the "temple of speculative truth,"
the short piece, written at this date, and showing his state of feeling,
deserves to be quoted:--

  "ite hinc inanes ite rhetorum ampullae...
  scholasticorum natio madens pingui:...
  tuque o mearum cura, sexte, curarum
  vale sabine: iam valete formosi.
  nos ad beatos vela mittimus portus
  magni patentes docta dicta sironis,
  vitamque ab omni vindicabimus cura.
  ite hinc camenae...
  dulces camenae, nam (fatebimur verum)
  dulces fuistis: et tamen meas chartas
  revisitote, sed pudenter et varo."

these few lines are very interesting, first, as enabling us to trace the
poetic influence of catullus, whose style they greatly resemble, though
their moral tone is far more serious; secondly, as showing us that virgil
was in aristocratic company, the names mentioned, and the epithet
_formosi_, by which the young nobles designated themselves, after the
greek _kaloi, kalokagathoi_, indicating as much; and thirdly, as evincing
a serious desire to embrace philosophy for his guide in life, after a
conflict with himself as to whether he should give up writing poetry, and
a final resolution to indulge his natural taste "seldom and without
licentiousness." we can hardly err in tracing this awakened earnestness
and its direction upon the epicurean system to his first acquaintance with
the poem of lucretius. the enthusiasm for philosophy expressed in these
lines remained with virgil all his life. poet as he was, he would at once
be drawn to the theory of the universe so eloquently propounded by a
brother-poet. and in all his works a deep study of lucretius is evidenced
not only by imitations of his language, but by frequent adoption of his
views and a recognition of his position as the loftiest attainable by man.
[4] the young romans at this time took an eager interest in the problems
which philosophy presents, and most literary men began their career as
disciples of the lucretian theory. [5] experience of life, however,
generally drew them away from it. horace professed to have been converted
by a thunder-clap in a clear sky; this was no doubt irony, but it is clear
that in his epistles he has ceased to be an epicurean. virgil, who in the
_eclogues_ and _georgics_ seems to sigh with regret after the doctrines he
fears to accept, comes forward in the _aeneid_ as the staunch adherent of
the national creed, and where he acts the philosopher at all, assumes the
garb of a stoic, not an epicurean. but he still desired to spend his later
days in the pursuit of truth; it seemed as if he accepted almost with
resignation the labours of a poet, and looked forward to philosophy as his
recompense and the goal of his constant desire. [6] we can thus trace a
continuity of interest in the deepest problems, lasting throughout his
life, and, by the sacrifice of one side of his affections, tinging his
mind with that subtle melancholy so difficult to analyse, but so
irresistible in its charm. the craving to rest the mind upon a solid
ground of truth, which was kept in abeyance under the republic by the
incessant calls of active life, now asserted itself in all earnest
characters, and would not be content without satisfaction. virgil was cut
off before his philosophical development was completed, and therefore it
is useless to speculate what views he would have finally espoused. but it
is clear that his tone of mind was in reality artistic and not
philosophical. systems of thought could never have had real power over him
except in so far as they modified his conceptions of ideal beauty: he
possessed neither the grasp nor the boldness requisite for speculative
thought; all ideas as they were presented to his mind were unconsciously
transfused into materials for effects of art. and the little poem which
has led to these remarks seems to enshrine in the outpourings of an early
enthusiasm the secret of that divided allegiance between his real and his
fancied aptitudes, which impels the poet's spirit, while it hears the
discord, to win its way into the inner and more perfect harmony.

after the battle of philippi (42 b.c.) he appears settled in his native
district cultivating pastoral poetry, but threatened with ejection by the
agrarian assignations of the triumvirs. pollio, who was then prefect of
gallia transpadana, interceded with octavian, and virgil was allowed to
retain his property. but on a second division among the veterans, varus
having now succeeded to pollio, he was not so fortunate, but with his
father was obliged to fly for his life, an event which he has alluded to
in the first and ninth eclogues. the fugitives took refuge in a villa that
had belonged to siro, [7] and from this retreat, by the advice of his
friend cornelius gallus, he removed to rome, where, 37 b.c., he published
his _eclogues_. these at once raised him to eminence as the equal of
varius, though in a different department; but even before their
publication he had established himself as an honoured member of maecenas's
circle. [8] the liberality of augustus and his own thrift enabled him to
live in opulence, and leave at his death a very considerable fortune.
among other estates he possessed one in campania, at or near naples, which
from its healthfulness and beauty continued till his death to be his
favourite dwelling-place. it was there that he wrote the _georgics_, and
there that his bones were laid, and his tomb made the object of
affectionate and even religious veneration. he is not known to have
undertaken more than one voyage out of italy; but that contemplated in the
third ode of horace may have been carried out, as prof. sellar suggests,
for the sake of informing himself by personal observation about the
localities of the _aeneid_; for it seems unlikely that the accurate
descriptions of book iii. could have been written without some such direct
knowledge. the rest of his life presents no event worthy of record. it was
given wholly to the cultivation of his art, except in so far as he was
taken up with scientific and antiquarian studies, which he felt to be
effectual in elevating his thought and deepening his grasp of a great
subject. [9] the _georgics_ were composed at the instance of maecenas
during the seven years 37-30 b.c., and read before augustus the following
year. the _aeneid_ was written during the remaining years of his life, but
was left unfinished, the poet having designed to give three more years to
its elaboration. as is well known, it was saved from destruction and given
to the world by the emperor's command, contrary to the poet's dying wish
and the express injunctions of his will. he died at brundisium (19 b.c.)
at the comparatively early age of 51, of an illness contracted at megara,
and aggravated by a too hurried return. the tour on which he had started
was undertaken from a desire to see for himself the coasts of asia minor
which he had made aeneas visit. such was the life and such the premature
death of the greatest of roman bards.

even those who have judged the poems of virgil most unfavourably speak of
his character in terms of warmest praise. he was gentle, innocent, modest,
and of a singular sweetness of disposition, which inspired affection even
where it was not returned, and in men who rarely showed it. [10] at the
same time he is described as silent and even awkward in society, a trait
which dante may have remembered when himself taunted with the same
deficiency. his nature was pre-eminently a religious one. dissatisfied
with his own excellence, filled with a deep sense of the unapproachable
ideal, he reverenced the ancient faith and the opinions of those who had
expounded it. this habit of mind led him to underrate his own poetical
genius and to attach too great weight to the precedents and judgment of
others. he seems to have thought no writer so common-place as not to yield
some thought that he might make his own; and, like milton, he loves to pay
the tribute of a passing allusion to some brother poet, whose character he
valued, or whose talent his ready sympathy understood. in an age when
licentious writing, at least in youth, was the rule and required no
apology, virgil's early poems are conspicuous by its almost total absence;
while the _georgics_ and _aeneid_ maintain a standard of lofty purity to
which nothing in latin, and few works in any literature, approach. his
flattery of augustus has been censured as a fault; but up to a certain
point it was probably quite sincere. his early intimacy with varius, the
caesarian poet, and possibly the general feeling among his fellow
provincials, may have attracted him from the first to caesar's name; his
disposition, deeply affected by power or greatness, naturally inclined him
to show loyalty to a person; and the spell of success when won on such a
scale as that of augustus doubtless wrought upon his poetical genius.
still, no considerations can make us justify the terms of divine homage
which he applies in all his poems, and with every variety of ornament, to
the emperor. indeed, it would be inconceivable, were it not certain, that
the truest representative of his generation could, with the approbation of
all the world, use language which, but a single generation before, would
have called forth nothing but scorn.

virgil was tall, dark, and interesting-looking, rather than handsome; his
health was delicate, and besides a weak digestion, [11] he suffered like
other students from headache. his industry must, in spite of this, have
been extraordinary; for he shows an intimate acquaintance not only with
all that is eminent in greek and latin literature, but with many recondite
departments of ritual, antiquities, and philosophy, [12] besides being a
true interpreter of nature, an excellence that does not come without the
habit as well as the love of converse with her. of his personal feelings
we know but little, for he never shows that unreserve which characterises
so many of the roman writers; but he entertained a strong and lasting
friendship for gallus, [13] and the force and truth of his delineations of
the passion of love seem to point to personal experience. like horace, he
never married, and his last days are said to have been clouded with regret
for the unfinished condition of his great work.

the early efforts of virgil were chiefly lyric and elegiac pieces after
the manner of catullus, whom he studied with the greatest care, and two
short poems in hexameters, both taken from the alexandrines, called
_culex_ and _moretum_, of which the latter alone is certainly, the
formerly possibly, genuine. [14] among the short pieces called _catalecta_
we have some of exquisite beauty, as the dedicatory prayer to venus and
the address to siro's villa; [15] others show a vein of invective which we
find it hard to associate with the gentle poet; [16] others, again, are
parodies or close imitations of catullus; [17] while one or two [18] are
proved by internal evidence to be by another hand than virgil's. the
_copa_, "mine hostess," which closes the series, reminds us of virgil in
its expression, rhythm, and purity of style, but is far more lively than
anything we possess of his. it is an invitation to a rustic friend to put
up his beast and spend the hot hours in a leafy arbour where wine, fruits,
and goodly company wait for him. we could wish the first four lines away,
and then the poem would be a perfect gem. its clear joyous ring marks the
gay time of youth; its varied music sounds the prelude to the metrical
triumphs that were to come, and if it is not virgil's, we have lost in its
author a _genre_ poet of the rarest power.

the _moretum_ is a pleasing idyll, describing the daily life of the
peasant simplus, translated probably from the greek of parthenius. on it
teuffel says, "suevius had written a _moretum_, and it is not improbable
that the desire to surpass suevius influenced virgil in attempting the
same task again." [19] trifling as this circumstance is, nothing that
throws any light on the growth of virgil's muse can be wanting in
interest. virgil was not one of those who startle the world by their
youthful genius. his soul was indeed a poet's from the first, but the rich
perfection of his verse was not developed until after years of severe
labour, self-correction, and even failure. he began by essaying various
styles; he gradually confined himself to one; and in that one he wrought
unceasingly, always bringing method to aid talent, until, through various
grades of immaturity, he passed to a perfection peculiarly his own, in
which thought and expression are fused with such exceeding art as to elude
all attempts to disengage them. if we can accept the _culex_ in its
present form as genuine, the development of virgil's genius is shown to us
in a still earlier stage. whether he wrote it at sixteen or twenty-six
(and to us the latter age seems infinitely the more probable), it bears
the strongest impress of immaturity. it is true the critics torment us by
their doubts. some insist that it cannot be by virgil. their chief
arguments are derived from the close resemblances (which they regard as
imitations) to many passages in the _aeneid_; but of these another, and
perhaps a more plausible, explanation may be given. the hardest argument
to meet is that drawn from the extraordinary imperfection of the plot,
which mars the whole consistency of the poem; [20] but even this is not
incompatible with virgil's authorship. for all ancient testimony agrees in
regarding the _culex_ of virgil as a poem of little merit. [21] amid the
uncertainty which surrounds the subject, it seems best not to disturb the
verdict of antiquity, until better grounds are discovered for assigning
our present poem to a later hand. to us the evidence seems to point to the
virgilian authorship. the defect in the plot marks a fault to which virgil
certainly was prone, and which he never quite cast off. [22] the
correspondences with the mythology, language, and rhythm of virgil are
just such as might be explained by supposing them to be his first opening
conceptions on these points, which assumed afterwards a more developed
form. [23] and this is the more probable because virgil's mind created
with labour, and cast and re-cast in the crucible of reflection ideas of
which the first expression suggested itself in early life. thus we find in
the _aeneid_ similes which had occurred in a less finished form in the
_georgics_; in both _georgics_ and _aeneid_ phrases or cadences which seem
to brood over and strive to reproduce half-forgotten originals wrought out
long before. nothing is more interesting in tracing virgil's genius, than
to note how each fullest development of his talent subsumes and embraces
those that had gone before it; how his mind energises in a continuous
mould, and seems to harp with almost jealous constancy on strings it has
once touched. the deeper we study him, the more clearly is this feature
seen. unlike other poets who throw off their stanzas and rise as if freed
from a load, virgil seems to carry the accumulated burden of his creations
about with him. he imitates himself with the same elaborate assimilation
by which he digests and reproduces the thoughts of others.

it is probable that virgil suppressed all his youthful poetry, and
intended the _eclogues_ to be regarded as the first-fruits of his genius.
[24] the pastoral had never yet been cultivated at rome. of all the
products of later greece none could vie with it in truth to nature. its
sicilian origin bespoke a fresh inspiration, for it arose in a land where
the muse of hellas still lingered. theocritus's vivid delineation of
country scenes must have been full of charm to the romans, and virgil did
well to try to naturalise it. not even his matchless grace, however, could
atone for the want of reality that pervades an imported type of art.
sicilian shepherds, roman _literati_, sometimes under a rustic disguise,
sometimes in their own person; a landscape drawn, now from the vales round
syracuse, now from the poet's own district round mantua; playful contests
between rural bards interspersed with panegyrics on julius caesar and the
patrons or benefactors of the poet; a continual mingling of allegory with
fiction, of genuine rusticity with assumed courtliness; such are the
incongruities which lie on the very surface of the _eclogues_. add to
these the continual imitations, sometimes sinning against the rules of
scholarship, [25] which make them, with all their beauties, by far the
least original of virgil's works, the artificial character of the whole
composition; and the absence of that lofty self-consciousness on the
poet's part [26] which lends so much fire to his after works: and it may
seem surprising that the _eclogues_ have been so much admired. but the
fact is, their irresistible charm outweighs all the exceptions of
criticism. while we read we become like virgil's own shepherd; we cannot
choose but surrender ourselves to the magic influence:

  "tale tuum carmen nobis, divine poeta,
  quale sopor fessis in gramine, quale per herbam
  dulcis aquae saliente sitim restinguere rivo." [27]

this charm is due partly to the skill with which the poet has blended
reality with allegory, fancy with feeling, partly to the exquisite
language to which their music is attuned. the latin language had now
reached its critical period of growth, its splendid but transitory epoch
of ripe perfection. literature had arrived at that second stage of which
conington speaks, [28] when thought finds language no longer as before
intractable and inadequate, but able to keep pace with and even assist her
movements. trains of reflection are easily awakened; a diction matured by
reason and experience rivals the flexibility or sustains the weight of
consecutive thought. it is now that an author's mind exhibits itself in
its most concrete form, and that the power of style is first fully felt.
but language still occupies its proper place as a means and not an end;
the artist does not pay it homage for its own sake; this is reserved for
the next period when the meridian is already past.

it has already been said that the _georgics_ were undertaken at the
request of maecenas. [29] from more than one passage in the _eclogues_ we
should infer that virgil was not altogether content with the light themes
he was pursuing; that he had before his mind's eye dim visions of a great
work which should give full scope to the powers he felt within him. but
virgil was deficient in self-reliance. he might have continued to trifle
with bucolic poetry, had not maecenas enlisted his muse in a practical
object worthy of its greatness. this was the endeavour to rekindle the old
love of husbandry which had been the nurse of rome's virtue, and which was
gradually dying out. to this object virgil lent himself with enthusiasm.
to feel that his art might be turned to some real good, that it might
advance the welfare of the state, this idea acted on him like an
inspiration. he was by early training well versed in the details of
country life. and he determined that nothing which ardour or study could
effect should be wanting to make his knowledge at once thorough and
attractive. for seven years he wrought into their present artistic
perfection the technical details of husbandry; a labour of love wrought
out of study and experience, and directed, as merivale well says, to the
glorification of labour itself as the true end of man.

virgil's treatment is partially adapted from the alexandrines; but, as he
himself says, his real model is hesiod. [30] the combination of quaint
sententiousness with deep enthusiasm, which he found in the old poet, met
his conception of what a practical poem should be. and so, although the
desultory maxims of the _works and days_ give but a faint image of the
comprehensive width and studied discursiveness of the _georgics_, yet they
present a much more real parallel to it than the learned trifling of
aratus or nicander. for virgil, like lucretius, is no trifler: he uses
verse as a serious vehicle for impressing his conviction; he acknowledges,
so to say, the responsibility of his calling, [31] and writes in poetry
because poetry is the clothing of his mind. hence the _georgics_ must be
ranked as a link in the chain of serious treatises on agriculture, of
which cato's is the first and varro's the second, designed to win the
nation back to the study and discipline of its youth. and that columella
so understood it is clear both from his defending his opinions by frequent
quotation from it as a standard authority, and from his writing one book
of his voluminous manual in verses imitated from virgil. the almost
religious fervour with which virgil threw himself into the task of
arresting the decay of italian life, which is the dominant motive of the
_aeneid_, is present also in the _georgics_. the pithy condensation of
useful experience characteristic of cato,

  "utiliumque sagax rerum et divina futuri
  sortilegis non discrepuit sententia delphis," [32]

the fond antiquarianism of varro, "laudator temporis acti," unite, with
the newly-kindled hope of future glories to be achieved under caesar's
rule, to make the _georgics_ the most complete embodiment of roman
industrial views, as the _aeneid_ is of roman theology and religion. [33]
virgil aims at combining the stream of poetical talent, which had come
mostly from outside, [34] with the succession of prose compositions on
practical subjects which had proceeded from the burgesses themselves. cato
and varro are as continually before his mind as ennius, catullus, and
lucretius. a new era had arrived: the systematising of the results of the
past he felt was committed to him. of virgil's works the _georgics_ is
unquestionably the most artistic. grasp of the subject, clearness of
arrangement, evenness of style, are all at their highest excellence; the
incongruities that criticism detects in the _eclogues_, and the
unrealities that often mar the _aeneid_, are almost wholly absent. there
is, however, one great artistic blemish, for which the poet's courage, not
his taste, is to blame. we have already spoken of his affection for
gallus, celebrated in the most extravagant but yet the most ethereally
beautiful of the eclogues; [35] and this affection, unbroken by the
disgrace and exile of its object, had received a yet more splendid tribute
in the episode which closed the _georgics_. unhappily, the beauties of
this episode, so honourable to the poet's constancy, are to us a theme for
conjecture only; the narrow jealousy of augustus would not suffer any
honourable mention of one who had fallen under his displeasure; and, to
his lasting disgrace, he ordered virgil to erase his work. the poet weakly
consented, and filled up the gap by the story, beautiful, it is true, but
singularly inappropriate, of aristacus and orpheus and eurydice. this epic
sketch, alexandrine in form but abounding in touches of the richest native
genius, [36] must have revealed to rome something of the loftiness of
which virgil's muse was capable. with a felicity and exuberance scarcely
inferior to ovid, it united a power of awakening feeling, a dreamy pathos
and a sustained eloquence, which marked its author as the heir of homer's
lyre, "_magnae spes altera romae_." [37]

in a work like this it would be obviously out of place to offer any minute
criticism either upon the beauties or the difficulties of the _georgics_.
we shall conclude this short notice with one or two remarks on that love
of nature in latin poetry of which the _georgics_ are the most renowned
example. dunlop has called virgil a landscape painter. [38] in so far as
this implies a faithful and picturesque delineation of natural scenes,
whether of movement or repose, [39] the criticism is a happy one: virgil
lingers over these with more affection than any previous writer. the
absence of a strong feeling for the peaceful or the grand in nature has
often been remarked as a shortcoming of the greek mind, and it does not
seem to have been innate even in the italian. alpine scenery suggested no
associations but those of horror and desolation. even the more attractive
beauties of woods, rills, and flowers, were hailed rather as a grateful
exchange from the turmoil of the city than from a sense of their intrinsic
loveliness; it is the repose, the comfort, ease, in a word the _body_, not
the _spirit_ of nature that the roman poets celebrate. [40] as a rule
their own retirement was not spent amid really rustic scenes. the villas
of the great were furnished with every means of making study or
contemplation attractive. rich gardens, cool porticoes, and the shade of
planted trees were more to the poet's taste than the rugged stile or the
village green. their aspirations after rural simplicity spring from the
weariness of city unrealities rather than from the necessity of being
alone with nature. as a fact the poems of virgil were not composed in a
secluded country retreat, but in the splendid and fashionable vicinity of
naples. [41] the lake of avernus, the sibyl's cave, and the other scenes
so beautifully painted in the _aeneid_ are all near the spot. from his
luxurious villa the poet could indulge his reverie on the simple rusticity
of his ancestors or the landscapes famous in the scenery of greek song. at
such times his mind called up images of greek legend that blended with his
delineations of italian peasant life: [42]

                             "o ubi campi
   spercheiosque, et virginibus bacchata lacaenis
   taygeta; o qui me gelidis in vallibus haemi
   sistat, et ingenti ramorum protegat umbra!"

the very name _tempe_, given so often to shady vales, shows the mingled
literary and aesthetic associations that entered into the love of rural
ease and quiet. the deeper emotion peculiar to modern times, which
struggles to find expression in the verse of shelley or wordsworth, in the
canvass of turner, in the life of restless travel, often a riddle so
perplexing to those who cannot understand its source; the mysterious
questionings which ask of nature not only what she says to us, but what
she utters to herself; why it is that if she be our mother, she veils her
face from her children, and will not use a language they can understand--

  "cur natum crudelis tu quoque falsis
  ludis imaginibus? cur dextrae iungere dextram
  non datur, et veras audire et reddere voces?"

feelings like these which--though often but obscurely present, it would
indeed be a superficial glance that did not read in much of modern
thought, however unsatisfactory, in much of modern art, however imperfect
--we can hardly trace, or, if at all, only as lightest ripples on the
surface, scarcely ruffling the serene melancholy, deep indeed, but self-
contained because unconscious of its depth, in which virgil's poetry
flows.

at what time of his life virgil turned his thoughts to epic poetry is not
known. probably like most gifted poets he felt from his earliest years the
ambition to write a heroic poem. he expresses this feeling in the
_eclogues_ [43] more than once; pollio's exploits seemed to him worthy of
such a celebration. [44] in the  _georgics_ he declares that he will wed
caesar's glories to an epic strain, [45] but though the emperor urged him
to undertake the subject, which was besides in strict accordance with epic
precedent, his mature judgment led him to reject it. [46] like milton, he
seems to have revolved for many years the different themes that came to
him, and, like him, to have at last chosen one which by mounting back into
the distant past enabled him to indulge historical retrospect, and gather
into one focus the entire subsequent development. as to his aptitude for
epic poetry opinions differ. niebuhr expresses the view of many great
critics when he says, "virgil is a remarkable instance of a man mistaking
his vocation; his real calling was lyric poetry; his small lyric poems
show that he would have been a poet like catullus if he had not been led
away by his desire to write a great graeco-latin poem." and mommsen, by
speaking of "successes like that of the _aeneid_" evidently inclines
towards the same view. it must be conceded that virgil's genius lacked
heroic fibre, invention, dramatic power. he had not an idea of "that stern
joy that warriors feel," so necessary to one who would raise a martial
strain. the passages we remember best are the very ones that are least
heroic. the funeral games in honour of anchises, the forlorn queen, the
death of nisus and euryalus, owe all their charm to the sacrifice of the
heroic to the sentimental. had virgil been able to keep rigidly to the
lofty purpose with which he entered on his work, we should perhaps have
lost the episodes which bring out his purest inspiration. so far as his
original endowments went, his mind certainly was not cast in a heroic
mould. but the counter-balancing qualifications must not be forgotten. he
had an inextinguishable enthusiasm for his art, a heart

  "smit with the love of ancient song,"

a susceptibility to literary excellence never equalled, [47] and a spirit
responsive to the faintest echo of the music of the ages. [48] the very
faculties that bar his entrance into the circle of creative minds enable
him to stand first among those epic poets who own a literary rather than
an original inspiration. for in truth epic poetry is a name for two widely
different classes of composition. the first comprehends those early
legends and ballads which arise in a nation's vigorous youth, and embody
the most cherished traditions of its gods and heroes and the long series
of their wars and loves. strictly native in its origin, such poetry is the
spontaneous expression of a people's political and religious life. it may
exist in scattered fragments bound together only by unity of sentiment and
poetic inspiration: or it may be welded into a whole by the genius of some
heroic bard. but it can only arise in that early period of a nation's
history when political combination is as yet imperfect, and scientific
knowledge has not begun to mark off the domain of historic fact from the
cloudland of fancy and legend. of this class are the homeric poems, the
_nibelungen lied_, the norse ballads, the _edda_, the _kalewala_, the
legends of arthur, and the poem of the _cid_: all these, whatever their
differences, have this in common, that they sprang at a remote period out
of the earliest traditions of the several peoples, and neither did nor
could have originated in a state of advanced civilization. it is far
otherwise with the other sort of epics. these are composed amid the
complex influences of a highly developed political life. they are the
fruit of conscious thought reflecting on the story before it and seeking
to unfold its results according to the systematic rules of art. the stage
has been reached which discerns fact from fable; the myths which to an
earlier age seemed the highest embodiment of truth, are now mere graceful
ornaments, or at most faint images of hidden realities. the state has
asserted its dominion over man's activity; science, sacred and profane,
has given its stores to enrich his mind; philosophy has led him to
meditate on his place in the system of things. to write an enduring epic a
poet must not merely recount heroic deeds, but must weave into the recital
all the tangled threads which bind together the grave and varied interests
of civilized man.

it is the glory of virgil that alone with dante and milton he has achieved
this; that he stands forth as the expression of an epoch, of a nation.
that obedience to sovereign law, [49] which is the chief burden of the
_aeneid_, stands out among the diverse elements of roman life as specially
prominent, just as faith in the church's doctrine is the burden of
mediaevalism as expressed in dante, and as justification of god's
dealings, as given in scripture, forms the lesson of _paradise lost_,
making it the best poetical representative of protestant thought. none of
virgil's predecessors understood the conditions under which epic greatness
was possible. his successors, in spite of his example, understood them
still less. it has been said that no events are of themselves unsuited for
epic treatment, simply because they are modern or historical. [50] this
may be true; and yet, where is the poet that has succeeded in them? the
early roman poets were patriotic men; they chose for subjects the annals
of rome, which they celebrated in noble though unskilled verse. naevius.
ennius, accius, hostius, bibaculus, and varius before virgil, lucan and
silius after him, treated national subjects, some of great antiquity, some
almost contemporaneous. but they failed, as voltaire failed, because
historical events are not by themselves the natural subjects of heroic
verse. tasso chose a theme where history and romance were so blended as to
admit of successful epic treatment; but such conditions are rare. few
would hesitate to prefer the histories of herodotus and livy to any
poetical account whatever of the persian and punic wars; and in such
preference they would be guided by a true principle, for the domain of
history borders on and overlaps, but does not coincide with, that of
poetry.

the perception of this truth has led many, epic poets to err in the
opposite extreme. they have left the region of truth altogether, and
confined themselves to pure fancy or legend. this error is less serious
than the first; for not only are legendary subjects well adapted for epic
treatment, but they may be made the natural vehicle of deep or noble
thought. the _orlando furioso_ and the _faery queen_ are examples of this.
but more often the poet either uses his subject as a means for exhibiting
his learning or style, as statius, cinna, and the alexandrines; or loses
sight of the deeper meaning altogether, and merely reproduces the beauty
of the ancient myths without reference to their ideal truth, as was done
by ovid, and recently by mr. morris, with brilliant success, in his
_earthly paradise_. this poem, like the _metamorphoses_, does not claim to
be a national epic, but both, by their vivid realization of a mythology
which can never lose its charm, hold a legitimate place among the
offshoots of epic song.

virgil has overcome the difficulties and joined the best results of both
these imperfect forms. by adopting the legend of aeneas, which, since the
punic wars, had established itself as one of the firmest national beliefs,
[51] he was enabled without sacrificing reality to employ the resources of
homeric art; by tracing directly to that legend the glorious development
of roman life and roman dominion, he has become the poet of his nation's
history, and through it, of the whole ancient world.

the elements which enter into the plan of the _aeneid_ are so numerous as
to have caused very different conceptions of its scope and meaning. some
have regarded it as the sequel and counterpart of the _iliad_, in which
troy triumphs over her ancient foe, and greece acknowledges the divine
nemesis. that this conception was present to the poet is clear from many
passages in which he reminds greece that she is under rome's dominion, and
contrasts the heroes or achievements of the two nations. [52] but it is by
no means sufficient to explain the whole poem, and indeed is in
contradiction to its inner spirit. for in the eleventh aeneid [53] diomed
declares that after troy was taken he desires to have no more war with the
trojan race; and in harmony with this thought virgil conceives of the two
nations under rome's supremacy as working together by law, art, and
science, to advance the human race. [54] roman talent has made her own all
that greek genius created, and fate has willed that neither race should be
complete without the other. the germs of this fine thought are found in
the historian polybius, who dwelt on the grandeur of such a joint
influence, and perhaps through his intercourse with the scipionic circle,
gave the idea currency. it is therefore rather the final reconciliation
than the continued antagonism that the _aeneid_ celebrates, though of
course national pride dwells on the striking change of relations that time
had brought.

another view of the _aeneid_ makes it centre in augustus. aeneas then
becomes a type of the emperor, whose calm calculating courage was equalled
by his piety to the gods, and care for public morals. turnus represents
antony, whose turbulent vehemence (_violentia_) [55] mixed with generosity
and real valour, makes us lament, while we accept his fate. dido is the
egyptian queen whose arts fell harmless on augustus's cold reserve, and
whose resolve to die eluded his vigilance. drances, [56] the brilliant
orator whose hand was slow to wield the sword, is a study from cicero; and
so the other less important characters have historical prototypes. but
there is even less to be said for this view than for the other. it is
altogether too narrow, and cannot be made to correspond with, the facts of
history, nor do the characters on a close inspection resemble their
supposed originals. [57] beyond doubt the stirring scenes virgil had as a
young man witnessed, suggested points which he has embodied in the story,
but the greek maxim that "poetry deals with universal truth," [58] must
have been rightly understood by him to exclude all such dressing-up of
historical facts.

there remains the view to which many critics have lent their support, that
the _aeneid_ celebrates the triumph of law and civilization over the
savage instincts of man; and that because rome had proved the most
complete civilizing power, therefore it is to her greatness that
everything in the poem conspires. this view has the merit of being in
every way worthy of virgil. no loftier conception could guide his verse
through the long labyrinth of legend, history, religious and antiquarian
lore, in which for ten years of patient study his muse sought inspiration.
still it seems somewhat too philosophical to have been by itself his
animating principle. it is true, patriotism had enlarged its basis; the
city of rome was already the world, [59] and the growth of rome was the
growth of human progress. hence the muse, while celebrating the imperial
state, transcends in thought the limits of space and time, and swells, as
it were, the great hymn of humanity. but this represents rather the utmost
reach of the poet's flight after he has thrown himself into the empyrean
than the original definitely conceived goal on which he fixed his mind. we
should supplement this view by another held by macrobius and many latin
critics, and of which mr. nettleship, in a recent admirable pamphlet [60]
recognises the justice, viz. that the _aeneid_ was written with a
religious object, and must be regarded mainly as a religious poem. its
burning patriotism glows with a religious light. its hero is "religious"
(_pius_), not "beautiful" or "brave." [61] at the sacrifice even of
poetical effect his religious dependence on the gods is brought into
prominence. the action of the whole poem hinges on the divine will, which,
is not as in homer, a mere counterpart of the human, far less is
represented as in conflict with resistless destiny, but, cognizant of fate
and in perfect union with it, as overruling all lower impulses, divine or
human, towards the realization of the appointed end. this divine power is
jupiter, whom in the _aeneid_ he calls by this name as a concession to
conventional beliefs, but in the _georgics_ prefers to leave nameless,
symbolised under the title father. [62] jupiter is not the author, but he
is the interpreter and champion of destiny (_fata_), which lies buried in
the realm of the unknown, except so far as the father of the gods pleases
to reveal it. [63] deities of sufficient power or resource may defer but
cannot prevent its accomplishment. juno is represented doing this--the
idea is of course from homer. but jupiter does not desire to change
destiny, even if he could, though he feels compassion at its decrees
(_e.g._ at the death of turnus). the power of the divine fiat to overrule
human equity is shown by the death of turnus who has right, and of dido
who has the lesser wrong, on her side. thus punishment is severed from
desert, and loses its higher meaning; the instinct of justice is lost in
the assertion of divine power; and while in details the religion of the
_aeneid_ is often pure and noble, its ultimate conceptions of the relation
of the human and divine are certainly no advance on those of homer. the
verdict of one who reads the poem from this point of view will surely be
that of sellar, who denies that it enlightens the human conscience. every
form of the doctrine that might is right, however skilfully veiled, as it
is in the _aeneid_ by a thousand beautiful intermediaries, must be classed
among the crude and uncreative theories which mark an only half-reflecting
people. but when we pass from the philosophy of religion to the particular
manifestation of it as a national worship, we find virgil at his greatest,
and worthy to hold the position he held with later ages as the most
authoritative expounder of the roman ritual and creed. [64] he shared the
palm of learning with varro, and sympathy inclined towards the poet rather
than the antiquarian. the _aeneid_ is literally filled with memorials of
the old religion. the glory of aeneas is to have brought with him the
trojan gods, and through perils of every kind to have guarded his faith in
them, and scrupulously preserved their worship. it is not the trojan race
as such that the romans could look back to with pride as ancestors; they
are the _bis capti phryges_, who are but heaven-sent instruments for
consecrating the latin race to the mission for which it is prepared.
"_occidit_" says juno, "_occideritque sinas cum nomine troja:_" [65] and
aeneas states the object of his proposal in these words--

  "sacra deosque dabo; socer arma latinas habeto." [66]

this then being the lofty origin, the immemorial antiquity of the national
faith, the moral is easily drawn, that rome must never cease to observe
it. the rites to import which into the favoured land cost heaven itself so
fierce a struggle, which have raised that land to be the head of all the
earth, must not be neglected now that their promise has been fulfilled.
each ceremony embodies some glorious reminiscence; each minute
technicality enshrines some special national blessing.

here, as in the _georgics_, cato and varro live in virgil, but with far
less of narrow literalness, with far more of rich enthusiasm. we can well
believe that the _aeneid_ was a poem after augustus's heart, that he
welcomed with pride as well as gladness the instalments which, before its
publication, he was permitted to see, [67] and encouraged by unreserved
approbation so thorough an exponent of his cherished views. to him the
_aeneid_ breathed the spirit of the old cult. its very style, like that of
milton from the bible, was borrowed in countless instances from the sacred
manuals. when aeneas offers to the gods four prime oxen (_eximios tauros_)
the pious roman recognised the words of the ritual. [68] when the nymph
cymodoce rouses aeneas to be on his guard against danger with the words
"_vigilas ne deum gens? aenea, vigila!_" [69] she recalls the imposing
ceremony by which, immediately before a war was begun, the general struck
with his lance the sacred shields, calling on the god "_mars, vigila!_"
these and a thousand other allusions caused many of the later commentators
to regard aeneas as an impersonation of the pontificate. this is an error
analogous to, but worse than, that which makes him represent augustus; he
is a poetical creation, imperfect no doubt, but still not to be tied to
any single definition.

passing from the religious to the moral aspect of the _aeneid_, we find a
gentleness beaming through it, strangely contradicted by some of the
bloody episodes, which out of deference to homeric precedent virgil
interweaves. such are the human sacrifices, the ferocious taunts at fallen
enemies, and other instances of boasting or cruelty which will occur to
every reader, greatly marring the artistic as well as the moral effect of
the hero. tame as he generally is, a resigned instrument in the divine
hands, there are moments when aeneas is truly attractive. as conington
says, his kindly interest in the young shown in book v. is a beautiful
trait that is all virgil's own. his happy interview with evander, where,
throwing off the monarch, he chats like a roman burgess in his country
house; his pity for young lausus whom he slays, and the mournful tribute
of affection he pays to pallas, are touching scenes, which without
presenting aeneas as a hero (which he never is), harmonise far better with
the ideal virgil meant to leave us. but after all said, that ideal is a
poor one for purposes of poetry. aeneas is uninteresting, and this is the
great fault of the poem. turnus enlists our sympathy far more, he is
chivalrous and valiant; the wrong he suffers does not harden him, but he
lacks strength of character. the only personage who is "proudly conceived"
[70] is mezentius, the despiser of the gods. the absence of restraint
seems to have given the poet a more masculine touch; the address of the
old king to his horse, his only friend, is full of pathos. among female
characters camilla is perhaps original; she is graceful without being
pleasing. amata and juturna belong to the class _virago_, a term applied
to the latter by virgil himself. [71] lavinia is the modest maiden, a
sketch, not a portrait. dido is a character for all time, the _chef
d'oeuvre_ of the _aeneid_. among the stately ladies of the imperial house
--a livia, a scribonia, an octavia, perhaps a julia--virgil must have
found the elements which he has fused with such mighty power, [72] the
rich beauty, the fierce passion, the fixed resolve. dido is his greatest
effort: and yet she is not an individual living woman like helen or
ophelia. like racine, virgil has developed passions, not created persons.
the divine gift of tender, almost christian, feeling that is his, cannot
see into those depths where the inner personality lies hidden. among the
traditional characters few call for remark. the gods maintain on the whole
their homeric attributes, only hardened by time and by a roman moulding.
venus is, however, touched with magic skill; it may be questioned whether
words ever carried such suggestions of surpassing beauty as those in
which, twice in the poem, her mystic form [73] is veiled rather than
pourtrayed. the characters of ulysses and helen bear the debased, unheroic
stamp of the later greek drama; the last spark of goodness has left them,
and even his careful study of homer, seems to have had no effect in
opening the poet's eyes to the gross falsification. where virgil did not
feel obliged to create, he was to the last degree conventional.

a most interesting feature in the _aeneid_--and with it we conclude our
sketch--is its incorporation of all that was best in preceding poetry. all
roman poets had imitated, but virgil carried imitation to an extent
hitherto unknown. not only greek but latin writers are laid under
contribution in every page. some idea of his indebtedness to homer may be
formed from conington's commentary. sophocles and the other tragedians,
apollonius rhodius and the alexandrines are continually imitated, and
almost always improved upon. and still more is this the case with his
adaptations from naevius, ennius, lucretius, hostius, furius, &c. whose
works he had thoroughly mastered, and stored in his memory their most
striking rhythms or expressions. [74] massive lines from ennius, which as
a rule he has spared to touch, leaving them in all their rugged grandeur
planted in the garden of his verse, to point back like giant trees to the
time when that garden was a forest, bear witness at once to his reverence
for the old bard and to his own wondrous art. it is not merely for
literary effect that the old poets are transferred into his pages. a
nobler motive swayed him. the _aeneid_ was meant to be, above all things,
a national poem, carrying on the lines of thought, the style of speech,
which national progress had chosen; it was not meant to eclipse so much us
to do honour to the early literature. thus those bards who like naevius
and ennius had done good service to rome by singing, however rudely, her
history, find their _imagines_ ranged in the gallery of the _aeneid_.
there they meet with the flamens and pontiffs unknown and unnamed, who
drew up the ritual formularies, with the antiquarians and pious scholars
who had sought to find a meaning in the immemorial names, [75] whether of
places or customs or persons; with the magistrates, moralists, and
philosophers, who had striven to ennoble or enlighten roman virtue; with
the greek singers and sages, for they too had helped to rear the towering
fabric of roman greatness. all these meet together in the _aeneid_ as if
in solemn conclave, to review their joint work, to acknowledge its final
completion, and predict its impending fall. this is beyond question the
explanation of the wholesale appropriation of others' thought and
language, which otherwise would be sheer plagiarism. with that tenacious
sense of national continuity which had given the senate a policy for
centuries, virgil regards roman literature as a gradually expanded whole;
coming at the close of its first epoch, he sums up its results and enters
into its labours. so far from hesitating whether to imitate, he rather
hesitated whom not to include, if only by a single reference, in his
mosaic of all that had entered into the history of rome. his archaism is
but another side of the same thing. whether it takes the form of
archaeological discussion, [76] of antiquarian allusion, [77] of a mode of
narration which recalls the ancient source, [78] or of obsolete
expressions, forms of inflection, or poetical ornament, [79] we feel that
it is a sign of the poet's reverence for what was at once national and
old. the structure of his verse, while full of music, often reminds us of
the earlier writers. it certainly has more affinity with that of lucretius
than with that of lucan. a learned roman reading the _aeneid_ would feel
his mind stirred by a thousand patriotic associations. the quaint old
laws, the maxims and religious formulae he had learnt in childhood would
mingle with the richest poetry of greece and rome in a stream flowing
evenly, and as it would seem, from a single spring; and he who by his art
had effected this wondrous union would seem to him the prophet as well as
the poet of the era. that art, in spite of its occasional lapses, for we
must not forget the work was unfinished, is the most perfect the world has
yet seen. the poet's exquisite sense of beauty, the sonorous language he
wielded, the noble rivalry of kindred spirits great enough to stimulate
but not to daunt him, and the consciousness of living in a new time big
with triumphs, as he fondly hoped, for the useful and the good, all united
to make virgil not only the fairest flower of roman literature, but as the
master of dante, the beloved of all gentle hearts, and the most widely-
read poet of any age, to render him an influential contributor to some of
the deepest convictions of the modern world.


appendix.

note i.--_imitations of virgil in propertius, ovid, and manilius._

the prestige of virgil made him a subject for imitation even during his
lifetime. just as carlyle, tennyson, and other vigorous writers soon
create a school, so virgil stamped the poetical dialect for centuries. but
he offered two elements for imitation, the declamatory or rhetorical,
which is most prominent in his speeches, and in the second and sixth
books; and detached passages showing descriptive imagery, touches of
pathos, similes, &c. these last might he imitated without at all unduly
influencing the individuality of the imitator's style. in this way ovid is
a great imitator of virgil; so to a less extent are propertius, manilius,
and lucan. statius and silius base their whole poetical art on him, and
therefore particular instances of imitation throw no additional light on
their style. we shall here notice a few of the points in which the
augustan poets copied him:--

(1) _in facts._--beside the great number of early historical points on
which he was followed implicitly, we find even his errors imitated, _e.g._
the confusion which perhaps in virgil is only apparent between pharsalia
and philippi, has, as merivale remarks, been adopted by propertius (iv.
10,40), ovid (m. xv, 824), manilius (i. 906), lucan (vii. 854), and
juvenal (viii. 242); not so much from ignorance of the locality as out of
deference to virgilian precedent. the lines may be quoted--virgil (g. i.
489), _ergo inter se paribus concurrere telis romanas acies iterum videre
philippi;_ propertius, _una philippeo sanguine inusta nota;_ ovid,
_emathiaque iterum madefient caede philippi;_ manilius, _arma philippeos
implerunt sanguine campos. vixque etiam sicca miles romanus arena ossa
virum lacerosque prius superastitit artus;_ lucan, _scelerique secundo
praestatis nondum siccos hoc sanguine campos;_ juvenal, _thessaliae campis
octavius abstulit ... famam...._ this is analogous to the way in which the
satirists use the names consecrated by lucilius or horace as types of a
vice, and repeat the same symptoms _ad nauseam, e.g._ the miser who
anoints his body with train oil, who locks up his leavings, who picks up a
farthing from the road, &c. the veiled allusion to the poet anser (ecl.
ix. 36) is perhaps recalled by prop. iii. 32, 83, _sqq._ so the portents
described by virgil as following on the death of caesar are told again by
manilius at the end of bk. i. and referred to by lucan (_phars._ i.) and
ovid. again, the confusion between _inarime_ and _ein arimois_, into which
virgil falls, is borrowed by lucan (_phars._ v. 101).

(2) _in metre._--as regards metre, ovid in the _metamorphoses_ is nearest
to him, but differs in several points, he imitates him--(_a_) in not
admitting words of four or more syllables, except very rarely, at the end
of the line; (_b_) in rhythms like _vulnificus sus_ (viii. 358), and the
not unfrequent _spondetazontes_; (_c_) in keeping to the two caesuras as
finally established by him, and avoiding beginnings like _scilicet omnibus
| est_, &c. in all these points manilius is a little less strict than
ovid, _e.g._ (i. 35) _et veneranda_, (iii. 130) _sic breviantur_, (ii.
716) _altribuuntur_. he also follows virgil in alliteration, which ovid
does not. they differ from virgil in--(_a_) a much more sparing employment
of elision. the reason of this is that elision marks the period of living
growth; as soon as the language had become crystallised, each letter had
its fixed force, the caprices of common pronunciation no longer
influencing it; and although no correct writer places the unelided _m_
before a vowel, yet the great rarity of elision not only of _m_ but of
long and even short vowels (except _que_) shows that the main object was
to avoid it, if possible. the great frequency of elision in virgil must be
regarded as an archaism. (_b_) in a much lesser variety of rhythm. this
is, perhaps, rather an artistic defect, but it is designed. manilius,
however, has verses which virgil avoids, _e.g. delcetique sacerdotes_ (i.
47), probably as a reminiscence of lucretius.

imitations in language are very frequent. propertius gives _ah pereat!
qui_ (i. 17, 13), from the _copa_. again, _sit licet et saxo patientior
illa sicano_ (i. 16, 29), from the _cyclopia saxa_ of _aeneid_, i. 201;
_cum tamen_ (i. 1, 8) with the indic. as twice in virgil; _umbria me
genuit_ (i. 23, 9), perhaps from the _mantua me genuit_ of virgil's
epitaph. these might easily be added to. ovid in the _metamorphoses_ has a
vast number of imitations of which we select the most striking; _plebs
habitat diversa locis_ (i. 193); _navigat, hic summa_, &c. (i. 296); cf.
_naviget, haec summa est_, in the 4th aeneid; _similisque roganti_ (iii.
240), _amarunt me quoque nymphae_ (iii. 454); _arma manusque meae, mea,
nate, potentia, dixit_ (v. 365); _heu quantum haec niobe niobe distabat ab
illa_ (vi. 273); _leti discrimine parvo_ (vi. 426); _per nostri foedera
lecti, perque deos supplex oro superosque neosque, per si quid merui de te
bene_ (vii. 852); _maiorque videri_ (ix. 269). these striking
resemblances, which are selected from hundreds of others, show how
carefully he had studied him. of all other poets i have noticed but two or
three imitations in him, _e.g. multi illum pueri, multae cupiere puellae_
(iii. 383), from catullus; _et merito, quid enim...?_ (ix. 585) from
propertius (i. 17). manilius also imitates virgil's language, _e.g. acuit
mortalia corda_ (i. 79), _acherunta movere_ (i. 93), _molli cervice
reflexus_ (i. 334), and his sentiments in _omnia conando docilis solertia
vicit_ (i. 95), compared with _labor omnia vicit improbus: invictamque sub
hectore troiam_ (i. 766), with _decumum quos distulit hector in annum_ of
the _aeneid_; cf. also iv. 122, and _litora litoribus regnis contraria
regna_ (iv. 814); cf. also iv. 28, 37.


note ii.--_on the shortening of final o in latin poetry._

the fact that in latin the accent was generally thrown back caused a
strong tendency to shorten long final vowels. the one that resisted this
tendency best was _o_, but this gradually became shortened as poetry
advanced, and is one of the very few instances of a departure from the
standard of quantity as determined by ennius. there is one instance even
in him: _horrida romuleum certamina pango duellum_. the words _ego_ and
_modo_, which from their frequent use are often shortened in the
comedians, are generally long in ennius; lucretius uses them as common,
but retains _homo_, which after him does not appear. catullus has one
short _o_, _virro_ (89, 1), but this is a proper name. virgil has
_sci0_ (_aen._ iii. 602), but _ego, homo_, when in the arsis, are
always elided, _e.g. pulsus ego? aut; graius homo, infectos. spondeo_
which used to be read (_aen._ ix, 294), is now changed to _sponde_.
_pollio_ is elided by virgil, shortened by horace (o. ii. i. 14). he also
has _mentio_ and _dixero_ in the _satires_ (i. iv. 93, 104). a line by
maecenas, quoted in suetonius, has _diligo_. ovid has _cito, puto_ (_am._
iii. vii. 2), but only in such short words; in nouns, _naso_ often,
_origo, virgo_, once each. tibullus and propertius are stricter in this
respect, though propertius has _findo_ (iii. or iv. 8 or 9, 35); manilius
has _leo, virgo_ (i. 266), lucan _virgo_ (ii. 329), _pulmo_ (iii. 644),
and a few others. gratius first gives the imperative _reponito_ (_cyn._
56); calpurnius, in the the time of nero, the false quantities _quando
ambo_, the latter (ix. 17) perhaps in a spurious eclogue; so _expecto_. in
statius no new licenses appear. juvenal, however, gives _vigilando_ (iii.
232), an improper quantity repeated by seneca (_tro._ 264) _vincendo_,
nemesianus (viii. 53) _mulcendo_, (ix. 80), _laudano_. juvenal gives also
_sumito, octo, ergo_. the dat. and abl. sing. are the only terminations
that were not affected. we see the gradual deterioration of quantity, and
are not surprised that even before the time of claudian a strict knowledge
of it was confined to the most learned poets.


note iii.--_on parallelism in virgil's poetry._

there is a very frequent feature in virgil's poetry which we may compare
to the parallelism well known as the chief characteristic of hebrew verse.
in that language the poet takes a thought and either repeats it, or varies
it, or explains it, or gives its antithesis in a corresponding clause, as
evenly as may be balancing the first. as examples we may take--

(1) a mere iteration:

  "why do the nations so furiously rage together?
  and why do the people imagine a vain thing?"

(2) contrast:

  "a wise son maketh a glad father:
  but a foolish son is the heaviness of his  mother."

this somewhat rude idea of ornament is drawn no doubt from the simplest
attempts to speak with passion or emphasis, which naturally turned to
_iteration_ or _repetition_ as the obvious means of gaining the effect.
roman poetry, as we have already said, rests upon a primitive and rude
basis, the greek methods of composition being applied to an art arrested
before its growth was complete. the fondness for repetition is very
prominent. phrases like _somno gravidi vinoque sepulti; indu foro lato,
sanctoque senatu_, occur commonly in ennius; and the trick of composition
of which they are the simplest instances, is perpetuated throughout roman
poetry. it is in reality rather rhetorical than poetical, and abounds in
cicero. it scarcely occurs in greek poetry, but is very common in virgil,
_e.g. _:

  "ambo florentes aetatibus, arcades ambo,
  et cantare pares, et respondere parati."

similar to this is the introduction of
corresponding clauses by the same
initial word, _e.g. ille_ (_ecl._ i. 17):

  "namque erit _ille_ mihi semper deus: _illius_ aram
  saepe tener nostris ab ovilibus imbuet agnus.
  _ille_ meas errare boves..."

instances of this construction will occur to every reader. frequently the
first half of the hexameter expresses a thought obscurely which is
expressed clearly in the latter half, or _vice versa, e.g._ (g. iv. 103):

  "at quum incerta volant, caeloque examina ludunt."

again (_aen._ iv. 368):

  "nam quid dissimulo, aut quae me ad maiora reservo?"

at times this parallelism is very useful as helping us to find out the
poet's meaning, _e.g._ (_aen._ ii. 121):

  "cui fata parent, quem poseat apollo."

here interpretations vary between _fata_, n. to _parent_, and acc. after
it. but the parallelism decides at once in favour of the former "for whom
the fates are making preparations; whom apollo demands." to take another
instance (_aen_. i. 395):

  "nunc terras ordine longo
  aut capere, aut captas, iam despectare videntur."

this passage is explained by its parallelism with another a little further
on (v. 400):

  "puppesque tuae plebesque tuorum
  aut portum tenet aut pleno subit ostia velo."

here the word _capere_ is fixed to mean "settling on the ground" by the
words _portum tenet_. once more in _aen_. xii. 725:

  "quem damnet labor, aut quo vergat pondere letum,"

the difficulty is solved both by the iteration in the line itself, by
which _damnet labor = vergat letum_; and also by its close parallelism
with another (v. 717), which is meant to illustrate it:

                 "mussantque iuvencae
  quis nemori imperitet quem tota armenta sequantur."

this feature in virgil's verse, which might be illustrated at far greater
length, reappears under another form in the ovidian elegiac. there the
pentameter answers to the second half of virgil's hexameter verse, and
rings the changes on the line that has preceded in a very similar way. a
literature which loves the balanced clauses of rhetoric will be sure to
have something analogous. our own heroic couplet is a case in point. so
perhaps is the invention of rhyme which tends to confine the thought
within the oscillating limits of a refrain, and that of the stanza, which
shows the same process in a much higher stage of complexity.


note iv.--_on the legends connected with virgil_.

side by side with the historical account of this poet is a mythical one
which, even within the early post-classical period, began to gain
credence. the reasons of it are to be sought not so much in his poetical
genius as in the almost ascetic purity of his life, which surrounded him
with a halo of mysterious sanctity. prodigies are said, in the lives that
have come down to us, to have happened at his birth; his mother dreamt she
gave birth to a laurel-branch, which grew apace until it filled the
country. a poplar planted at his birth suddenly grew into a stately tree.
the infant never cried, and was noted for the preternatural sweetness of
its temper. when at naples he is said to have studied medicine, and cured
augustus's horses of a severe ailment. augustus ordered him a daily
allowance of bread, which was doubled on a second instance of his
chirurgical knowledge, and trebled on his detecting the true ancestry of a
rare spanish hound! credited with supernatural knowledge, though he never
pretended to it, he was consulted privately by augustus as to his own
legitimacy. by the cautious dexterity of his answer, he so pleased the
emperor that he at once recommended him to pollio as a person to be well
rewarded. the mixture of fable and history here is easily observed. the
custom of making pilgrimages to his tomb, and in the case of silius
italicus (and doubtless others too), of honouring it with sacrifices,
seems to have produced the belief that he was a great magician. even as
early as hadrian the _sortes virgilianae_ were consulted from an idea that
there was a sanctity about the pages of his book; and, as is well known,
this superstitious custom was continued until comparatively modern times.

meanwhile plays were represented from his works, and amid the general
decay of all clear knowledge a confused idea sprung up that these stories
were inspired by supernatural wisdom. the supposed connection of the
fourth eclogue with the _sibylline books_, and through them, with the
sacred wisdom of the hebrews, of course placed virgil on a different level
from other heathens. the old hymn, "dies irae dies illa solvet saeclum cum
favilla teste david cum sibylla," shows that as early as the eighth
century the sibyl was well established as one of the prophetic witnesses;
and the poet, from the indulgence of an obscure style, reaped the great
reward of being regarded almost as a saint for several centuries of
christendom. dante calls him _virtu summa_, just as ages before justinian
had spoken of homer as _pater omnis virtutis_. but before dante's time the
real virgil had been completely lost in the ideal and mystic poet whose
works were regarded as wholly allegorical.

the conception of virgil as a magician as distinct from an inspired sage
is no doubt a popular one independent of literature, and had originally a
local origin near naples where his tomb was. foreign visitors disseminated
the legend, adding striking features, which in time developed almost an
entire literature.

in the _otia imperialia_ of gervasius of tilbury, we see this belief in
formation; the main point in that work is that he is the protector of
naples, defending it by various contrivances from war or pestilence. he
was familiarly spoken of among the neapolitans as _parthenias_, in
allusion to his chastity. it was probably in the thirteenth century that
the connection of virgil with the sibyl was first systematically taught,
and the legends connected with him collected into one focus. they will be
found treated fully in professor comparetti's work. we append here a very
short passage from the _gesta romanorum_ (p. 590), showing the necromantic
character which surrounded him:--

"refert alexander philosophus de natura rerum, quod vergilius in civitate
romana nobile construxit palatium, in cuius medio palatii stabat imago,
quae dea romana vocabatur. tenebat enim pomum aureum in manu sua. per
circulum palatii erant imagines cuiuslibet regionis, quae subiectae erant
romano imperio, et quaelibet imago campanam ligneam in manu sua habebat.
cum vero aliqua regio nitebatur romanis insidias aliquas imponere, statim
imago eiusdem regionis campanam suam pulsavit, et miles exivit in equo
aeneo in summitate predicti palatii, hastam vibravit, et predictam
regionem inspexit. et ab instanti romani hoc videntes se armaverunt et
predictam regionem expugnaverunt.

"ista civitas est corpus humanum: quinque portae sunt quinque sensus:
palatium est anima rationalis, et aureum pomum similitudo cum deo. tria
regna inimica sunt caro, mundus, diabolus, et eius imago cupiditas,
voluptas, superbia."

the above is a good instance both of the supernatural powers attributed to
the poet, and the supernatural interpretation put upon his supposed
exercise of them. this curious mythology lasted throughout the fourteenth
century, was vehemently opposed in the fifteenth by the partisans of
enlightened learning, and had not quite died out by the middle of the
sixteenth.




chapter iii.

horace (65-8 b.c.).


if virgil is the most representative, horace is the most original poet of
rome. this great and varied genius, whose exquisite taste and deep
knowledge of the world have made him the chosen companion of many a great
soldier and statesman, suggesting as he does reflections neither too ideal
nor too exclusively literary for men of affairs, was born at or near
venusia, on the borders of lucania and apulia, december 8, 65 b.c. [1] his
father was a freedman of the horatia gens, [2] but set free before the
poet's birth. [3] we infer that he was a tax-gatherer, or perhaps a
collector of payments at auctions; for the word _coactor_, [4] which
horace uses, is of wide application. at any rate his means sufficed to
purchase a small farm, where the poet passed his childhood. horace was
able to look back to this time with fond and even proud reminiscences, for
he relates how prodigies marked him even in infancy as a special favourite
of the gods. [5] at the age of twelve he was brought by his father to rome
and placed under the care of the celebrated orbilius pupillus. [6] the
poet's filial feeling has left us a beautiful testimony to his father's
affectionate interest in his studies. the good man, proud of his son's
talent, but fearing the corruptions of the city, accompanied him every day
to school, and consigned him in person to his preceptor's charge, [7] a
duty usually left to slaves called _paedagogi_, who appear to have borne
no high character for honesty, [8] and at best did nothing to improve
those of whom they had the care. from the shrewd counsels of his father,
who taught by instances not by maxims, [9] and by his own strict example,
horace imbibed that habit of keen observation and that genial view of life
which distinguish him above all other satirists. he also learnt the
caution which enabled him to steer his course among rocks and shoals that
would have wrecked a novice, and to assert his independence of action with
success even against the emperor himself.

the life of horace is so well known that it is needless to retrace it
here. we shall do no more than summarise the few leading events in it,
alluding more particularly to those only which affect his literary
position. after completing his education so far in the capital, he went
for a time, as was customary, to study philosophy at athens. [10] while he
was there the death of caesar and the events which followed roused the
fierce party spirit that had uneasily slumbered. horace, then twenty-two
years of age, was offered a command by brutus on his way to macedonia,
which he accepted, [11] and apparently must have seen some hard service.
[12] he shared the defeat of the republicans at philippi, [13] and as the
territory of venusium, like that of cremona, was selected to be parcelled
out among the soldiery, horace was deprived of his paternal estate, [14] a
fact from which we learn incidentally that his father was now dead.

thrown upon his own resources, he sought and obtained permission to come
to rome, where he obtained some small post as a notary [15] attached to
the quaestors. poverty drove him to verse-making, [16] but of what kind we
do not certainly know. probably epodes and satires were the first fruits
of his pen, though some scholars ascribe certain of the _odes_ (_e.g._ i.
14) to this period. about this time he made the acquaintance of virgil,
which ripened at least on horace's part into warm affection. virgil and
varius introduced him to maecenas, [17] who received the bashful poet with
distant hauteur, and did not again send for him until nine months had
elapsed. slow to make up his mind, but prompt to act when his decision was
once taken, maecenas then called for horace, and in the poet's words bade
him be reckoned among his friends; [18] and very shortly afterwards we
find them travelling together to brundisium on a footing of familiar
intimacy (39 b.c.). this circumspection of maecenas was only natural, for
horace was of a very different stamp from varius and virgil, who were warm
admirers of octavius. horace, though at first a platonist, [19] then an
epicurean, [20] then an eclectic, was always somewhat of a "free lance."
[21] his mind was of that independent mould which can never be got to
accept on anybody's authority the solution of problems which interest it.
even when reason convinced him that imperialism, if not good in itself,
was the least of all possible evils, ho did not become a hearty partisan;
he maintained from first to last a more or less critical attitude. thus
maecenas may have heard of his literary promise, of his high character,
without much concern. it was the paramount importance of enlisting so able
a man on his own side that weighed with the shrewd statesman. for horace,
with the recklessness that poverty inspires, had shown a disposition to
attack those in power. it is generally thought that maecenas himself is
ridiculed under the name malthinus. [22] it is nevertheless clear that
when he knew maecenas he not only formed a high opinion of his character
and talent, but felt a deep affection for him, which expresses itself in
the generous language of an equal friend, with great respect, indeed, but
totally without unworthy complaisance. the minister of monarchy might
without inconsistency gain his goodwill; with the monarch it was a
different matter. for many years horace held aloof from augustus. he made
no application to him; he addressed to him no panegyric. until the year
29, when the temple of janus was closed, he showed no approval of his
measures. all his laudatory odes were written after that event. he indeed
permitted the emperor to make advances to him, to invite him to his table,
and maintain a friendly correspondence. but he refused the office of
secretary which augustus pressed upon him. he scrupulously abstained from
pressing his claims of intimacy, as the emperor wished him to do; and at
last he drew forth from him the remorseful expostulation, "why is it that
you avoid addressing me of all men in your poems? is it that you are
afraid posterity will think the worse of you for having been a friend of
mine?" [23]

this appeal elicited from the poet that excellent epistle which traces the
history and criticises the merits of latin poetry. from all this we may be
sure that when augustus's measures are celebrated, as they are in the
third book of the odes and other places, with emphatic commendation,
though the language may be that of poetical exaggeration, the sentiment is
in the main sincere. it is a greater honour to the prudent ruler to have
won the tardy approval of horace, than to have enlisted from the outset
the enthusiastic devotion of virgil.

we left horace installed as one of maecenas's circle. this position
naturally gained him many enemies; nor was his character one to conciliate
his less fortunate rivals. he was choleric and sensitive, prompt to resent
an insult, though quite free from malice or vindictiveness. he had not yet
reached that high sense of his position when he could afford to treat the
envious crowd with contempt. [24] he records in the satires which he now
wrote, painting with inimitable humour each incident that arose, the
attempts of the outsiders to obtain from him an introduction to maecenas,
[25] or some of that political information of which he was supposed to be
the confidant. [26] at this period of his career he lived a good deal with
his patron both in rome and at his tiburtine villa. within a few years,
however (probably 31 b.c.), he was put in possession of what he had always
desired, [27] a small competence of his own. this was the sabine estate in
the valley of ustica, not far from tivoli, given him by maecenas, the
subject of many beautiful allusions, and the cause of his warmest
gratitude. [28] here he resided during some part of each year [29] in the
enjoyment of that independence which was to him the greatest good; and
during the seven years that followed he wrote, and at their close
published, the first three books of the odes. [30] the death of virgil,
which happened when horace was forty-six years of age, and soon afterwards
that of tibullus, threw his affections once more upon his early patrons.
he now resided more frequently at rome, and was often to be seen at the
palace. how he filled the arduous position of a courtier may be gathered
from many, of the epistles of the first book. the one which introduces
septimus to tiberius is a masterpiece; [31] and those to scaeva and
lellius [32] are models of high-bred courtesy. no one ever mingled
compliment and advice with such consummate skill. horace had made his
position at court for himself, and though he still loved the country best,
[33] he found both interest and profit in his daily intercourse with the
great.

in the year 17 b.c. augustus found an opportunity of testifying his regard
for horace. the secular games, which were celebrated in that year,
included the singing of a hymn to apollo and diana by a chorus of 27 boys
and the same number of girls, selected from the highest families in the
state. the composition of this hymn was intrusted to horace, much to his
own legitimate pride, and to our instruction and pleasure, for not only is
it a poem of high intrinsic excellence, but it is the only considerable
extant specimen of the lyrical part of roman worship. some scholars
include under it besides the _carmen saeculare_ proper, various other
odes, some of which unquestionably bear on the same subject, though, there
is no direct evidence of their having been sung together. [34] whether
horace had any roman models in this style before him is not very clear. we
have seen that livius andronicus was selected to celebrate the victory of
sena, [35] and there is an ode of catullus [36] which seems to refer to
some similar occasion. doubtless the main lines in which the composition
moved were indicated by custom; but the treatment was left to the
individual genius of the poet. in this case we observe the poet's happy
choice of a metre. of all the varied lyric rhythms none, at least to our
ears, lends itself so readily to a musical setting as the sapphic; and the
many melodies attached to odes in this metre by the monks of the middle
ages attest its special adaptability to choir-singing. augustus was highly
pleased with the poet's performance, and two years' afterwards he
commanded him to celebrate the victory of his step-sons drusus and
tiberius over the rhaeti and vindelici. [37] this circumstance turned his
attention once more to lyric poetry, which for six years he had quite
discontinued. [38] it is not conclusively proved that he wrote all the
odes which compose the fourth book at this period; two or three bear the
impress of an earlier date, and were doubtless improved by re-writing or
revision, but the majority were the production of his later years, and
present to us the fruits of his matured judgment and taste. they show no
diminution of lyric power, but the reverse; nor is there any ode in the
first three books which surpasses or even equals the fourth poem in this
collection. horace's attention was, during the last few years of his life,
given chiefly to literary subjects; the treatise on poetry and the epistle
to julius florus were written probably between 14 and 11 b.c. that to
augustus is the last composition that issued from his pen; we may refer it
to 10 b.c. two years before his death.

horace's health had long been the reverse of strong. whether from early
delicacy, or from exposure to hardships in asia, his constitution was
never able to respond to the demands made upon it by the society of the
capital. the weariness he expresses was often the result of physical
prostration. the sketch he has left of himself [39] suggests a physique
neither interesting nor vigorous. he was at 44 short, fat, and good-
natured looking (rallied, we learn, by augustus on his obesity), blear-
eyed, somewhat dyspeptic, and prematurely grey; and ten years, we may be
sure, had not improved the portrait. in the autumn of 8 b.c. maecenas, who
had long been himself a sufferer, succumbed to the effects of his devoted
and arduous service. his last message confided horace to the emperor's
care: "_horatii flacci ut mei esto memor_." but the legacy was not long a
burden. the prophetic anticipations of affection that in death the poet
would not be parted from his friend [40] were only too faithfully
realised. within a month of maecenas's death horace was borne to his rest,
and his ashes were laid beside those of his patron on the esquiline
(november 29, 8 b.c.).

as regards the date of publication of his several books, several theories
have been propounded, for which the student is referred to the many
excellent editions of horace that discuss the question. we shall content
ourselves with assigning those dates which seem to us the most probable.
all agree in considering the first book of the satires to have been his
earliest effort. this may have been published in 34 b.c.; and in 29 b.c.
the two books of satires together, and perhaps the _epodes_. in 24 b.c.
probably appeared the first two books of odes, which open and close with a
dedication to maecenas, and in 23 b.c. the three books of odes complete;
though some suppose that all appeared at once and for the first time in
this later year. in 21 b.c. perhaps, but more probably in 20, the first
book of the epistles was published; in 14 b.c. the fourth book of the
odes, though it is possible that the last ode of that book was written at
a later date. the second book of epistles, in which may have been included
the _ars poetica_, could not have appeared before 10 b.c. it is clear that
the latter poem is not complete, but whether horace intended to finish it
more thoroughly it is impossible to say.

in approaching the criticism of horace, the first thing which strikes us
is, that in him we see two different poets. there is the lyricist winning
renown by the importation of a new kind of greek song; and there is the
observant critic and man of the world, entrusting to the tablets, his
faithful companions, his reflections on men and things. the former poet
ran his course through the _epodes_ to the graceful pieces which form the
great majority of his odes, and culminated in the loftier vein of lyric
inspiration that characterises his political odes. the latter began with a
somewhat acrimonious type of satire, which he speedily deserted for a
lighter and more genial vein, and finally rested in the sober, practical,
and healthy moralist and literary critic of the _epistles_. it was in the
former aspect that he assumed the title of poet; with characteristic
modesty he relinquishes all claim to it with regard to his _epistles_ and
_satires_. we shall consider him briefly under these two aspects.

no writer believed so little in the sufficiency of the poetic gift by
itself to produce a poet. had he trusted the maxim _poeta nascitur, non
fit_, he would never have written his _odes_. looking back at his early
attempts at verse we find in them few traces of genuine inspiration. of
the _epodes_ a large number are positively unpleasing; others interest us
from the expression of true feeling; a few only have merits of a high
order. the fresh and enthusiastic, though somewhat diffuse, descriptions
of country enjoyments in the second and sixteenth epodes, and the vigorous
word-painting in the fifth, bespeak the future master; and the patriotic
emotion in the seventh, ninth, and sixteenth, strikes a note that was to
thrill with loftier vibrations in the odes of the third and fourth books.
but as a whole the _epodes_ stand far below his other works. their
bitterness is quite different from the genial irony of the _satires_, and,
though occasionally the subjects of them merited the severest handling,
[41] yet we do not like to see horace applying the lash. it was not his
proper vocation, and he does not do it well. he is never so unlike himself
as when he is making a personal attack. nevertheless to bring himself into
notice, it was necessary to do something of the kind. personal satire is
always popular, and horace had to carve his own way to fame. it is evident
that the series of sketches of which canidia is the heroine, [42] were
received with unanimous approval by the _beau monde_. this wretched woman,
singled out as the representative of a class which was gaining daily
influence in rome, [43] he depicts in colours detestable and ignominious,
which do credit to his talent but not to his courteous feeling. horace has
no true respect for woman. nothing in all latin poetry is so unpleasant as
his brutal attacks on those _hetaerae_ (the only ladies of whom he seems
to have had any knowledge) whose caprice or neglect had offended him. [44]
this is the one point in which he did not improve. in all other respects
his constant self-culture opened to him higher and ever widening paths of
excellence.

the glimpses of real feeling which the _epodes_ allow us to gain are as a
rule carefully excluded from the _odes_. this is at first sight a matter
for surprise. our idea of a lyric poem is that of a warm and passionate
outpouring of the heart. such are those of burns; such are those of nearly
all the writers who have gained the heart of modern times. in the grand
style of dithyrambic song, indeed, the bard is rapt into an ideal world,
and soars far beyond his subjective emotions or desires; but to this
pindaric inspiration horace made no pretension. he was content to be an
imitator of alcaeus and sappho, who had attuned to the lyre their own
hopes and fears, the joys and sorrows of their own chequered life. but in
imitating their form he has altogether changed their spirit. where they
indulged feeling, he has controlled it; what they effect by intensity of
colour, he attains by studied propriety of language. he desires not to
enlist the world to sympathy with himself, but to put himself in sympathy
with the world. hence the many-sidedness, the culture, the broad human
stand-point after which he ceaselessly strives. if depth must be
sacrificed to attain this, he is ready to sacrifice it. he finds a field
wide enough in the network of aims, interest, and feelings, which give
society its hold on us, and us our union with society. and he feels that
the writer who shall make his poem speak with a living voice to the
largest number of these, will meet with most earnest heed, and be doing
best the poet's true work. at the same time we must not forget that
horace's public was not our public. the unwieldy mass of labouring
millions, shaken to its depths by questionings of momentous interest,
cannot be drawn to listen except by an emotion vast as its own; but the
society for whom horace wrote was homogeneous in tone, limited in number,
cultivated in intellect, and deeply absorbed in a race of ambition, some
of whose prizes, at least, each might hope to win. he was, has been, and
intended himself to be, the poet of men of the world.

among such men at all times, and to an immeasurably greater extent in
antiquity than now, staunch friendship has been considered one of the
chief of virtues. whatever were horace's relations to the other sex, no
man whom he had once called a friend had any cause to complain. admirable
indeed in their frankness, their constancy, their sterling independence,
are the friendships it has delighted him to record. from the devoted,
almost passionate tribute to maecenas--

          "ibimus ibimus
  uteunque praecedes supremum
  carpere iter comites parati,"

to the raillery so gracefully flung at an iccius or xanthias, for whom yet
one discerns the kindest and tenderest feeling, these memorials of roman
intercourse place both giver and receiver in a truly amiable light. we can
understand augustus's regret that he had not been honoured with a regard
of which he well knew the value. for the poet was rich who could dispense
gifts like these.

interspersed with the love-odes, addresses to friends and _pieces de
circonstance_, we observe, even in the earlier books, lyrics of a more
serious cast. some are moral and contemplative, as the grand ode to
fortune [45] and that beginning

      "non ebur neque aureum
  mea renidet in domo lacunar." [46]

others are patriotic or political, as the second, twelfth, and thirty-
seventh of book i. (the last celebrating the downfall of cleopatra), and
the fifteenth of book ii. which bewails the increase of luxury. in these
horace is rising to the truly roman conception that poetry, like other
forces, should be consecrated to the service of the state. and now that he
could see the inevitable tendency of things, could gauge the emperor's
policy and find it really advantageous, he arose, no longer as a half-
unwilling witness, but as a zealous co-operator to second political by
moral power. the first six and the twenty-fourth odes of the third book
show us horace not indeed at his best as a poet, but at his highest as a
writer. they exhibit a more sustained manliness of tone than is perhaps to
be found in any passages of equal length from any other author. heathen
ethics have no nobler portrait than that of the just man tenacious of his
purpose, with which the third ode begins; and roman patriotism no grander
witness than the heart-stirring narrative of regulus going forth to
carthage to meet his doom. whether or not the third ode was written to
dissuade augustus from his rumoured project of transferring the seat of
empire from rome to troy, it expresses most strongly the firm conviction
of those best worth consulting, and, if the emperor really was in doubt,
must, in conjunction with virgil's emphatic repetition of the same
sentiment, [47] have effectually turned him from his purpose. for these
odes carried great authority. in them the poet appears as the authorised
voice of the state, dispensing _verba et voces_ [48] "the charm of poesy"
to allay the moral pestilence that is devouring the people.

no one can read the odes without being struck with certain features
wherein they differ from his other works. one of these is his constant
employment of the olympian mythology. whatever view we may hold as to
their appearance in the _aeneid_, there can he no doubt that in the _odes_
these deities have a purely fictitious character. with the single
exception of jupiter, the eternal father, without second or equal even
among the olympian choir, [49] whom he is careful not to name, none of his
allusions imply, but on the contrary implicitly disown, any belief in
their existence. in the satires and epistles he never employs this
conventional ornament. the same thing is true of his language to augustus.
assuming the poet's license, he depicts him as the son of maia, [50] the
scion of kindly deities, [51] and a living denizen of the ethereal
mansions. [52] but in the epistles he throws off this adulatory tone, and
accosts the caesar in a way befitting their mutual relations; for in
declaring that altars are raised to him and men swear by his name, [53] he
is not using flattery, but stating a fact. another point of difference is
his fondness in the odes for commonplaces, _e.g._ the degeneracy of the
age, [54] the necessity of enjoying the moment, [55] which he enforces
with every variety of illustration. neither of these was the result of
genuine conviction. on the former he gives us his real view (a very noble
and rational one) in the third satire of the first book, [56] and in the
_ars poetica_, as different as possible from the desponding pessimism of
ode and epode. and the epicurean maxims which in them he offers as the sum
of wisdom, are in his _epistles_ exchanged for their direct opposites:
[56]

  "omnem crede diem tibi diluxisse supremum,
  sperne voluptates; nocet empta dolore voluptas."

it is clear then that in the _odes_, for the most part, he is an artist
not a preacher. we must not look to them for his deepest sentiments, but
for such, and such only, as admitted an effective lyric treatment.

as regards their form, we observe that they are moulded strictly upon the
greek, some of those on lighter themes being translations or close
imitations. but in naturalising the greek metres, he has accommodated them
with the rarest skill to the harmonies of the latin tongue. the virgilian
movement differs not more from the homeric, than does the horatian sapphic
or alcaic from the same metres as treated by their greek inventors. the
success of horace may be judged by comparing his stanzas with the sapphics
of catullus on the one hand, and the alcaics of statius on the other. the
former struggle under the complicated shackles of greek prosody; the
latter move on the stilts of school-boy imitation. in language he is
singularly choice without being a purist; agreeably to their naturalised
character he has interspersed the odes with greek constructions, some
highly elegant, others a little forced and bordering upon experiments on
language. [57] the poetry of his language consists not so much in its
being imaginative, as in its employing the fittest words in the fittest
places. its general level is that of the best epistolary or oratorical
compositions, according to the elevation of the subject. he loves not to
soar into the empyrean, but often checks pegasus by a strong curb, or by a
touch of irony or an incongruous allusion prevents himself or his reader
being carried away. [58] this mingling of irony and earnest is thoroughly
characteristic of his genius. to men of realistic minds it forms one of
the greatest of its charms.

among the varied excellences of these gems of poetry, we shall select
three, as those after which horace most evidently sought. they are
brevity, ease, life. in the first he is perhaps unequalled. it is not only
that what he says is terse; in what he omits we recognise the master hand.
he knows precisely what to dwell on, what to hint at, what to pass by. he
is on the best understanding with his reader. he knows the reader is a
busy man, and he says--"read me! and, however you may judge my work, you
shall at least not be bored." we recollect no instance in which horace is
prolix; none in which he can be called obscure; though there are many
passages that require weighing, and many abrupt transitions that somewhat
task thought. in condensed simplicity he is the first of latin poets. who
that has once heard can forget such phrases as _nil desperandum, splendide
mendax, non omnis moriar, dulce et decorum est pro patria mori_, and a
hundred others? his brevity is equalled by his ease. by this must not be
understood either spontaneity of invention or rapidity of execution. we
know that he was a slow, nay, a laborious workman.[59] but he has the _ars
celare artem_. what can be more natural than the transition from the
praises of young nero to hannibal's fine lament? [60] from those of
augustus to the speech of juno? [61] yet these are effected with the most
subtle skill. and even when the digression appears more forced, as in the
well-known instances of europa [62] and the danaides, [63] the incongruity
is at once removed by supposing that the legend in each case forms the
main subject of the poem, and that the occasional introductions are a
characteristic form of preamble, perhaps reflected from pindar. and once
more as to his liveliness. this is the highest excellence of the _odes_.
it never flags. if the poet does not rise to an exalted inspiration, he at
least never sinks into heaviness, never loses life. to cite but one ode,
in an artistic point of view, perhaps, the jewel of the whole collection--
the dialogue between the poet and lydia; [64] here is an entire comedy
played in twenty-four lines, in which the dialogue never becomes insipid,
the action never flags. like all his love odes it is barren of deep
feeling, for which reason, perhaps, they have been compared to scentless
flowers. but the comparison is most unjust. aroma, _bouquet:_ this is
precisely what they do _not_ lack. some other metaphor must be sought to
embody the deficiency. at the same time the want is a real one; and
exquisite as are the _odes_, no one knew better than their author himself
that they have no power to pierce the heart, or to waken those troubled
musings which in their blending of pain and pleasure elevate into
something that it was not before, the whole being of him that reads them.

the _satires_ and _epistles_ differ somewhat in form, in elaboration, and
in metrical treatment, but on the whole they have sufficient resemblance
to be considered together. the horatian satire is _sui generis_. in the
familiar modern sense it is not satire at all. the censorious spirit that
finds nothing to praise, everything to ridicule, is quite alien to horace.
neither persius nor juvenal, boileau nor pope, bears any real resemblance
to him. the two former were satirists in the modern sense; the two latter
have caught what we may call the _town_ side of horace, but they are
accomplished epigrammatists and rhetoricians, which he is not, and they
entirely lack his strong love for the simple and the rural. horace is
decidedly the least rhetorical of all roman poets. his taste is as free
from the contamination of the basilica [65] as it is from that of
alexandrinism. as in lyric poetry he went straight to the fountain-head,
seeking models among the bards of old greece, so in his _prose-poetry_, as
he calls the _satires_, [66] he draws from the well of real experience,
departing from it neither to the right hand nor to the left. this is what
gives his works their lasting value. they are all gold; in other words,
they have been dug for. refined gold all certainly are not, many of them
are strikingly the reverse; for all sorts of subjects are treated by them,
bad as well as good. the poet professes to have no settled plan, but to
wander from subject to subject, as the humour or the train of thought
leads him; as plato says--

  _opae an o logos agoi, tautae iteon_.

without the slightest pretence of authority or the right to dictate, he
contrives to supply us with an infinite number of sound and healthy moral
lessons, to reason with us so genially and with so frank an admission of
his own equal frailty, that it is impossible to be angry with him,
impossible not to love the gentle instructor. he has been accused of
tolerance towards vice. that is, we think, a great error. horace knew men
too well to be severe; his is no trumpet-call, but a still small voice,
which pleads but does not accuse. he was no doubt in his youth a lax
liver; [67] he had adopted the epicurean creed and the loose conduct that
follows it. but he was struggling towards a purer ideal. even in the
_satires_ he is only half an epicurean; in the _epistles_ he is not one at
all: and in proportion as he has outlived the hot blood of youth, his
voice becomes clearer and his faith in virtue stronger. the _epistles_ are
to a great extent reflective; he has examined his own heart, and depicts
his musings for our benefit. many of them are moral essays filled with
precepts of wisdom, the more precious as having been genuinely thought out
by the writer for himself. less dramatic, less vigorous, perhaps, than the
_satires_, they embody in choicest language the maturest results of his
reflection. their poetical merits are higher, their diction more chaste,
their metre more melodious. with the _georgics_ they are ranked as the
most perfect examples of the modulation of hexameter verse. their movement
is rippling rather than flowing, and satisfies the mind rather than the
ear, but it is a delicious movement, full of suggestive grace. the
diction, though classical, admits occasional colloquialisms. [68]

several of the _satires_, [69] and the three epistles which form the
second book, are devoted to literary criticism, and these have always been
regarded as among the most interesting of horace's compositions. his
opinions on previous and contemporary poetry are given with emphasis, and
as a rule ran counter to the opinion of his day. the technical dexterity
in versification which had resulted from the feverish activity of the last
forty years, had produced a disastrous consequence. all the world was
seized with the mania for writing poetry:

  "scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim."

the young pisos were among the number. to them the poet gave this friendly
counsel, to lock up their creations for nine years, and then publish, or
as we may shrewdly suspect he meant--destroy them. poetry is the one thing
that, if it is to be done at all, must be done well:

                   "mediocribus esse poetis
  non di, non homines, non concessere columnae."

in horace's opinion none of the old poetry came up to this standard. when
he quotes two lines of ennius [70] as defying all efforts to make prose of
them, we cannot help fancying he is indulging his ironical vein. he never
speaks seriously of ennius. in fact he thoroughly disliked the array of
"old masters" that were at once confronted with him whenever he expressed
a predilection. it was not only the populace who yawned over accius's
tragedies, or the critics who lauded the style of the salian hymn, that
moved his resentment. these he could afford to despise. it was rather the
antiquarian prepossessions of such men as virgil, maecenas, and augustus,
that caused him so earnestly to combat the love of all that was old. in
his zeal there is no doubt he has outrun justice. he had no sympathy for
the untamed vigour of those rough but spirited writers; his fastidious
taste could make no allowance for the circumstances against which they had
to contend. to reply that the excessive admiration lavished by the
multitude demanded an equally sweeping condemnation, is not to excuse
horace. one who wrote so cautiously would never have used exaggeration to
enforce his words. the disparaging remarks must be regarded as expressing
his real opinion, and we are not concerned to defend it.

his attitude towards the age immediately preceding his own is even less
worthy of him. he never mentions lucretius, though one or two allusions
[71] show that he knew and was indebted to his writings; he refers to
catullus only once, and then in evident depreciation, [72] mentioning him
and calvus as the sole literature of a second-rate singer, whom he calls
the ape of hermogenes tigellius. moreover his boast that he was the first
to introduce the archilochian iambic [73] and the lyric metres, [74]
though perhaps justifiable; is the reverse of generous, seeing that
catullus had treated before him three at least of the metres to which he
alludes. mr. munro's assertion as to there being indications that the
school of lucretius and catullus would have necessarily come into
collision with that of the augustan poets, had the former survived to
their time, is supported by horace's attitude. virgil and tibullus would
have found many points of union, so probably would gallus; but horace,
propertius, and ovid, would certainly have been antagonistic. it is
unfortunate that the canons laid down by horace found no followers. while
virgil had his imitators from the first, and tibullus and propertius
served as models to young aspirants, horace, strangely enough, found no
disciples. persius in a later age studied him with care, and tried to
reproduce his style, but with such a signal want of success that in every
passage where he imitates, he caricatures his master. he has, however,
left us an appreciative and beautiful criticism on the horatian method.
[75]

it has often been supposed that the _ars poetica_ was writen in the hope
of regenerating the drama. this theory is based partly on the length at
which dramatic subjects are treated, partly on the high pre-eminence which
the critic assigns to that class of poetry. but he can hardly have so far
deceived himself as to believe that any efforts of his could restore the
popular interest in the legitimate drama which had now sunk to the lowest
ebb. it should rather be considered as a deliberate expression of his
views upon many important subjects connected with literary studies,
written primarily for the young pisos, but meant for the world at large,
and not intended for an exhortation (_adhortatio_) so much as a treatise.
its admirable precepts have been approved by every age: and there is
probably no composition in the world to which so few exceptions have been
taken.

here we leave horace, and conclude the chapter with a very short account
of some of his friends who devoted themselves to poetry. the first is c.
valgius rufus, who was consul in the year 12 b.c. and to whom the ninth
ode of the second book is addressed. whether from his high position or
from his genuine poetical promise, we find great expectations held
regarding him. tibullus (or rather, the author of the poem ascribed to
him) [76] says that no other poet came nearer to homer's genius, and
horace by asking him to celebrate the new trophies of augustus implies
that he cultivated an epic strain. [77] besides loftier themes he treated
erotic subjects in elegiac verse, translated the rhetoric of apollodorus,
[78] and wrote letters on grammar, probably in the form afterwards adopted
by seneca's moral epistles. aristius fuscus to whom the twenty-second ode
of the first book and the tenth epistle are addressed, was a writer of
some pretensions. it is not certain what line he followed, but in all
probability the drama. he was an intimate acquaintance of horace, and, it
will be remembered, delivered him from the intrusive acquaintance on the
via sacra. [79] fundanius, who is twice mentioned by horace, and once in
very complimentary terms as the best comic poet of the day, [80] has not
been fortunate enough to find any biographer. titus, one of the younger
men to whom so many of the epistles are addressed, was a very ambitious
poet. he attempted pindaric flights from which the genius of horace
shrank, and apparently he cultivated tragedy, but in a pompous and ranting
manner. [81] iccius, who is referred to in the ninth ode of book i., and
in the twelfth epistle, as a philosopher, may have written poems. julius
florus, to whom two beautiful epistles (i. iii. ii. ii.) are addressed, is
rallied by horace on his tendency to write love-poems, but apparently his
efforts came to nothing. celsus albinovanus was, like florus, a friend of
tiberius, to whom he acted as private secretary for some time; [82] he was
given to pilfering ideas and horace deals him a salutary caution:--

  "monitus multumque monendus
   privatas ut quaerat opes, et tangere vitet
   scripta palatinus quaecunque recepit apollo." [83]

the last of these friends we shall notice is julus antonius [84] a son of
the triumvir, who, according to acron, [85] wrote twelve excellent books
in epic metre on the legends of diomed, a work obviously modelled on those
of euphorion, whose fourteen books of _heracleia_ were extremely popular;
in a later age statius attempted a similar task in essaying the history of
achilles. the ode addressed to him by horace seems to hint at a foolish
ambition to imitate pindar. besides these lesser known authors horace
knew, though he does not mention, the poets ovid and domitius marsus;
probably also propertius. with tibullus he was long on terms of
friendship, and one epistle and one ode [86] are addressed to him. his
gentle nature endeared him to horace, as his graceful poetry drew forth
his commendation.




chapter iv.

the elegiac poets--gratius--manilius.


the short artificial elegy of callimachus and philetas had, as we have
seen, found an imitator in catullus. but that poet, when he addressed to
lesbia the language of true passion, wrote for the most part in lyric
verse. the augustan age furnishes a series of brilliant poets who united
the artificial elegiac with the expression of real feeling; and one of
them, ovid, has by his exquisite formal polish raised the latin elegiac
couplet to a popularity unparalleled in imitative literature. the metre
had at first been adapted to short epigrams modelled on the greek, _e.g._,
triumphal inscriptions, epitaphs, _jeux d'esprit_, &c., several examples
of which have been quoted in these pages. catullus and his contemporaries
first treated it at greater length, and paved the way for the highly
specialised form in which it appears in tibullus, the earliest augustan
author that has come down to us.

there are indications that roman elegy, like heroic verse, had two
separate tendencies. there was the comparatively simple continuous
treatment of the metre seen in catullus and virgil, who are content to
follow the greek rhythm, and there was the more rhetorical and pointed
style first beginning to appear in tibullus, carried a step further in
propertius, and culminating in the epigrammatic couplet of ovid. this last
is a peculiarly latin development, unsuited to the greek, and too
elaborately artificial to be the vehicle for the highest poetry, but, when
treated by one who is master of his method, admitting of a facility,
fluency, and incomparable elegance, which perhaps no other rhythm combines
in an equal degree. in almost all its features it may be illustrated by
the heroic couplet of pope. the elegiac line is in the strictest sense a
pendant to the hexameter; only rarely does it introduce a new element of
thought, and perhaps never a new commencement in narration. it is for the
most part an iteration, variation, enlargement, condensation or antithesis
of the idea embodied in its predecessor. in the most highly finished of
ovid's compositions this structure is carried to such a point that the
syntax is rarely altogether continuous throughout the couplet; there is
generally a break either natural or rhetorical at the conclusion of the
hexameter or within the first few syllables of the pentameter. [1] the
_rhetorical_ as distinct from the _natural_ period, which appears, though
veiled with great skill, in the virgilian hexameter, is in ovid's verse
made the key to the whole rhythmical structure, and by its restriction
within the _minimum_ space of two lines offers a tempting field to the
various tricks of composition, the turn, the point, the climax, &c. in all
of which ovid, as the typical elegist, luxuriates, though he applies such
elegant manipulation as rarely to over-stimulate and scarcely ever to
offend the reader's attention. the criticism that such a system cannot
fail to awaken is that of want of variety; and in spite of the diverse
modes of producing effect which these accomplished writers, and above all
ovid, well knew how to use, one cannot read them long without a sense of
monotony, which never attends on the far less ambitious elegies of
catullus, and probably would have been equally absent from those of
cornelius gallus.

this ill-starred poet, whose life is the subject of bekker's admirable
sketch, was born at forum julii (frejus) 69 b.c., and is celebrated as the
friend of virgil's youth. full of ambition and endowed with talent to
command or conciliate, he speedily rose in augustus's service, and was the
first to introduce virgil to his notice. for a time all prospered; he was
appointed the first prefect of egypt, then recently annexed as a province,
but his haughtiness and success had made him many enemies; he was accused
of treasonable conversation, and interdicted the palace of the emperor. to
avoid further disgrace he committed suicide, in the 43d year of his age
(27 b.c.). his poetry was entirely taken from alexandria; he translated
euphorion and wrote four books of love-elegies to cytheris. whether she is
the same as the lycoris mentioned by virgil, [2] whose faithlessness he
bewails, we cannot tell. no fragments of his remain, [3] but the
passionate nature of the man, and the epithet _durior_ applied to his
verse by quintilian, makes it probable that he followed the older and more
vigorous style of elegiac writing. [4]

somewhat junior to him was domitius marsus who followed in the same track.
he was a member of the circle of maecenas, though, strangely enough, never
mentioned by horace, and exercised his varied talents in epic poetry, in
which he met with no great success, for martial says [5]--

  "saepius in libro memoratur persius uno
      quam levis in toto marsus amazonide."

from this we gather that _amazonis_ was the name of his poem. in erotic
poetry he held a high place, though not of the first rank. his _fabellae_
and treatise on _urbanitas_, both probably poetical productions, are
referred to by quintilian, and martial mentions him as his own precursor
in treating the short epigram. from another passage of martial,

  "et maecenati maro cum cantaret alexin
      nota tamen marsi fusca melaenis erat," [6]

we infer that he began his career early; for he was certainly younger than
horace, though probably only by a few years, as he also received
instruction from orbilius. there is a fine epigram by marsus lamenting the
death of his two brother-poets and friends:

  "te quoque virgilio comitem non aequa, tibulle,
      mors invenem campos misit ad elysios.
  ne foret aut molles elegis qui fleret amores,
      aut caneret forti regia bella pede."

albius tibullus, to whom quintilian adjudges the palm of latin elegy, was
born probably about the same time as horace (65 b.c.), though others place
the date of his birth as late as that of messala (59 b.c.). in the fifth
elegy of the third book [7] occur the words--

  "natalem nostri primum videre parentes
      cum cecidit fato consul uterque pari."

as these words nearly reappear in ovid, fixing the date of his own
birth, [8] some critics have supposed them to be spurious here. but there
is no occasion for this. the elegy in which they occur is certainly not by
tibullus, and may well be the work of some contemporary of ovid. they
point to the battle of mutina, 43 b.c., in which hirtius and pansa lost
their lives. the poet's death is fixed to 19 b.c. by the epigram of
domitius just quoted.

tibullus was a roman knight, and inherited a large fortune. this, however,
he lost by the triumviral proscriptions, [9] excepting a poor remnant of
his estate near pedum which, small as it was, seems to have sufficed for
his moderate wants. at a later period horace, writing to him in
retirement, speaks as though he were possessed of considerable wealth
[10]--

  "di tibi divitias dederunt artemque fruendi."

it is possible that augustus, at the intercession of messala, restored the
poet's patrimony. it was as much the fashion among the augustan writers to
affect a humble but contented poverty, as it had been among the libertines
of the caesarean age to pretend to sanctity of life--another form of that
unreality which, after all, is ineradicable from latin poetry. ovid is far
more unaffected. he asserts plainly that the pleasures and refinements of
his time were altogether to his taste, and that no other age would have
suited him half so well. [11] tibullus is a melancholy effeminate spirit.
horace exactly hits him when he bids him "chant no more woeful elegies,"
[12] because a young and perjured rival has been preferred to him. he
seems to have had no ambition and no energy, but his position obliged him
to see some military service, and we find that he went on no less than
three expeditions with his patron. this patron, or rather friend, for he
was above needing a patron, was the great messala, whom the poet loved
with a warmth and constancy testified by some beautiful elegies, the
finest perhaps being those where the general's victories are celebrated.
[13] but the chief theme of his verse is the love, ill-requited it would
seem, which he lavished first on delia and afterwards on nemesis. each
mistress gives the subject to a book. delia's real name as we learn from
apuleius was plania, [14] and we gather from more than one notice in the
poems that she was married [15] when tibullus paid his addresses to her.
if the form of these poems is borrowed from alexandria, the gentle pathos
and gushing feeling redeem them from all taint of artificiality. in no
poet, not even in burns, is simple, natural emotion more naturally
expressed. if we cannot praise the character of the man, we must admire
the graceful poet. nothing can give a truer picture of affection than the
following tender and exquisitely musical lines:

  "non ego laudari curo: mea delia, tecum
      dummodo sim quaeso segnis inersque vocer.
  te spectem suprema mihi cum venerit hora:
      te teneam moriens deficiente manu." [16]

here is the same "linked sweetness long drawn out" which gives such a
charm to gray's elegy. in other elegies, particularly those which take the
form of idylls, giving images of rural peace and plenty, [17] we see the
quiet retiring nature that will not be drawn into the glare of rome.
tibullus is described as of great personal beauty, and of a candid [18]
and affectionate disposition. notwithstanding his devotion delia was
faithless, and the poet sought distraction in surrendering to the charms
of another mistress. horace speaks of a lady named glycera in this
connection; it is probable that she is the same as nemesis; [19] the
custom of erotic poetry being to substitute a greek name of similar
scansion for the original latin one; if the original name were greek the
change was still made, hence glycera might well stand for nemesis. the
third book was first seen by niebuhr to be from another and much inferior
poet. it is devoted to the praises of neaera, and imitates the manner of
tibullus with not a little of his sweetness but with much less power. who
the author was it is impossible to say, but though he had little genius he
was a man of feeling and taste, and the six elegies are a pleasing relic
of this active and yet melancholy time. the fourth book begins with a
short epic on messala, the work of a poetaster, extending over 200 lines.
it is followed by thirteen most graceful _elegidia_ ascribed to the lovers
cerinthus and sulpicia of which one only is by cerinthus. it is not
certain whether this ascription is genuine, or whether, as the ancient
life of tibullus in the parisian codex asserts, the poems were written by
him under the title of _epistolae amatoriae_. their finished elegance and
purity of diction are easily reconcilable with the view that they are the
work of tibullus. they abound in allusions to virgil's poetry. [20] at the
same time the description of sulpicia as a poetess [21] seems to point to
her as authoress of the pieces that bear her name, and from one or two
allusions we gather that messala was paying her attentions that were
distasteful but hard to refuse. [22] the materials for coming to a
decision are so scanty, that it seems best to leave the authorship an open
question.

the rhythm of tibullus is smooth, easy, and graceful, but tame. he
generally concludes his period at the end of the couplet, and closes the
couplet with a dissyllable; but he does not like ovid make it an
invariable rule. the diction is severely classical, free from greek
constructions and antiquated harshness. in elision he stands midway
between catullus and ovid, inclining, however, more nearly to the latter.

sex. aurelius propertius, an umbrian, from mevania, ameria, assisi, or
hispellum, it is not certain which, was born 58 b.c. or according to
others 49 b.c., and lost his father and his estate in the same year (41
b.c.) under octavius's second assignation of land to the soldiers. he
seems to have begun life at the bar, which he soon deserted to play the
cavalier to hostia (whom he celebrates under the name cynthia), a lady
endowed with learning and wit as well as beauty, to whom our poet remained
constant for five years. the chronology of his love-quarrels and
reconciliations has been the subject of warm disputes between nobbe,
jacob, and lachmann; but even if it were of any importance, it is
impossible to ascertain it with certainty.

he unquestionably belonged to maecenas's following, but was not admitted
into the inner circle of his intimates. some have thought that the
troublesome acquaintance who besought horace to introduce him was no other
than propertius. the man, it will be remembered, expresses himself willing
to take a humble place: [23]

                                "haberes
  magnum adiutorem posset qui ferre secundas
  hunc hominem velles si tradere. dispeream ni
  submosses omnes."

and as propertius speaks of himself as living on the esquiliae, [24] some
have, in conformity with this view, imagined him to have held some
domestic post under maecenas's roof. a careful reader can detect in
propertius a far less well-bred tone than is apparent in tibullus or
horace. he has the air of _a parvenu_, [25] parading his intellectual
wares, and lacking the courteous self-restraint which dignifies their
style. but he is a genuine poet, and a generous, warm-hearted man, and in
our opinion by far the greatest master of the pentameter that rome ever
produced. its rhythm in his hands rises at times almost into grandeur.
there are passages in the elegy on cornelia (which concludes the series)
whose noble naturalness and stirring emphasis bespeak a great and
patriotic inspiration; and no small part of this effect is due to his
vigorous handling of a somewhat feeble metre. [26] mechanically speaking,
he is a disciple in the same school as ovid, but his success in the
ovidian distich is insignificant; for he has nothing of the epigrammatist
in him, and his finest lines all seem to have come by accident, or at any
rate without effort. [27] his excessive reverence for the alexandrines
callimachus and philetas, has cramped his muse. with infinitely more
poetic fervour than either, he has made them his only models, and to
attain their reputation is the summit of his ambition. it is from respect
to their practice that he has loaded his poems with pedantic erudition; in
the very midst of passionate pleading he will turn abruptly into the mazes
of some obscure myth, often unintelligible [28] to the modern reader,
whose patience he sorely tries. there is no good poet so difficult to read
through; his faults are not such as "plead sweetly for pardon;" they are
obtrusive and repelling, and have been more in the way of his fame than
those of any extant writer of equal genius. he was a devoted admirer of
virgil, whose poems he sketches in the following graceful lines: [29]--

  "actia virgilio custodit (deus) litora phoebi,
    caesaris et fortes dicere posse rates:
   qui nunc aeneae troianaque suscitat arma,
    iactaque lavinis moenia litoribus.
   cedite romani seriptores, cedite graii,
    nescio quid maius nascitur iliade!
  tu canis umbrosi subter pineta galesi
    thyrsin et attritis daphnin arundinibus,
  utque decera possint corrumpere mala puellas,
    missus et impressis haedus ab uberibus.
  felix qui viles pomis mercaris amores!
    huic licet ingratae tityrus ipse canat.
  felix intactum corydon qui tentat alexin
    agricolae domini carpere delicias.
  quamvis ille sua lassus requiescat avena,
    laudatur faciles inter hamadryadas.
  tu canis ascraei veteris praecepta poetae,
    quo seges in campo, quo viret uva iugo.
  tale facis carmen, docta testudine quale
    cynthius impositis temperat articulis."

the elegies that show his characteristics best are the second of the first
book, where he prays his lady to dress modestly; the seventeenth, where he
rebukes himself for having left her side; the twentieth, where he tells
the legend of hylas with great pictorial power and with the finest
triumphs of rhythm; the beautiful lament for the death of paetus; [30] the
dream in which cynthia's shade comes to give him warning; [31] and the
patriotic elegy which begins the last book. maecenas, [32] it appears, had
tried to persuade him to attempt heroic poetry, from which uncongenial
task he excuses himself, much as horace had done.

in reading these poets we are greatly struck by the free and easy way in
which they borrow thoughts from one another. a good idea was considered
common property, and a happy phrase might be adopted without theft. virgil
now and then appropriates a word from horace, horace somewhat oftener one
from virgil, tibullus from both. propertius, who is less original, has
many direct imitations, and ovid makes free with some of virgil and
tibullus's finest lines. this custom was not thought to detract from the
writer's independence, inasmuch as each had his own domain, and borrowed
only where he would be equally ready to give. it was otherwise with those
thriftless bards so roughly dealt with by horace in his nineteenth
epistle--

  "o imitatores, servum pecus! ut mihi saepe
  bilem, saepe iocum movistis."

the baviad and maeviad of the roman poet-world. these lay outside the
charmed sphere, and the hands they laid on the works of those who wrought
within it were sacrilegious. in the next age we shall see how imitation of
these great masters had become a regular department of composition, so
that quintilian gives elaborate rules for making a proper use of it. at
this time originality consisted in introducing some new form of greek
song. virgil made theocritus and hesiod speak in latin. horace had brought
over the old aeolian bards; propertius, too, must make his boast of having
enticed callimachus to the tiber's banks--

  "primus ego ingredior puro de fonte sacerdos
  itala per graios orgia ferre chores." [33]

in the middle ages he was almost lost; a single copy, defaced with mould
and almost illegible, was found in a wine cellar in italy, 1451 a.d.
quintilian tells us there were some in his day who preferred him to
tibullus.

the same critic's remark on the brilliant poet who now comes before us, p.
ovidius naso, is as follows: "_ovidius utroque lascivior_" and he could
not have given a terser or more comprehensive criticism. of all latin
poets, not excepting even plautus, ovid possesses in the highest degree
the gift of facility. his words probably express the literal truth, when
he says--

  "sponte sua carmen numeros veniebat ad aptos,
  et quod tentabam scribere versus erat."

this incorrigibly immoral but inexpressibly graceful poet was born at
sulmo in the pelignian territory 43 b.c. of wealthy parents, whose want of
liberality during his youthful career he deplores, but by which he
profited after their death. of equestrian rank, with good introductions
and brilliant talents, he was expected to devote himself to the duties of
public life. at first he studied for the bar; but so slight was his
ambition and so unfitted was his genius for even the moderate degree of
severe reasoning required by his profession, that he soon abandoned it in
disgust, and turned to the study of rhetoric. for some time he declaimed
under the first masters, arellius fuscus and porcius latro, [34] and
acquired a power of brilliant improvisation that caused him to be often
quoted in the schools, and is evidenced by many reminiscences in the
writings of the elder seneca. [35] a short time was spent by him,
according to custom, at athens, [36] and while in greece he took the
opportunity of visiting the renowned cities of asia minor. he also spent
some time in sicily, and returned to rome probably at the age of 23 or 24,
where he allowed himself to be nominated _triumvir capitalis, decemvir
litibus iudicandis_, and _centumvir_, in quick succession. but in spite of
the remonstrances of his friends he finally gave up all active work, and
began that series of love-poems which was at once the cause of his
popularity and of his fall, his first mistress was a lady whom he calls
corinna, but whose real name is not known. that she was a member of the
_demi-monde_ is probable from this fact; as also from the poet's strong
assertion that he had never been guilty of an intrigue with a married
woman. the class to which she belonged were mostly greeks or easterns,
beautiful and accomplished, often poetesses, and mingling with these
seductive qualities the fickleness and greed natural to their position, of
which ovid somewhat unreasonably complains. to her are dedicated the great
majority of the _amores_, his earliest extant work. these elegant but
lascivious poems, some of which perhaps were the same which he recited to
large audiences as early as his twenty-second year, were published 13
b.c., and consisted at first of five books, which he afterwards reduced to
three. [37] no sooner were they before the public than they became
universally popular, combining as they do the personal experiences already
made familiar to roman audiences through tibullus and propertius, with a
levity, a dash, a gaiety, and a brilliant polish, far surpassing anything
that his more serious predecessors had attained. during their composition
he was smitten with the desire (perhaps owing to his asiatic tour) to
write an epic poem on the wars of the gods and giants, but corinna,
determined to keep his muse for herself, would not allow him to gratify
it. [38]

the _heroides_ or love-letters from mythological heroines to their
(mostly) faithless spouses, are declared by ovid to be an original
importation from greece. [39.] they are erotic _suasoriae_, based on the
declamations of the schools, and are perhaps the best appreciated of all
his compositions. they present the greek mythology under an entirely new
phase of treatment. virgil had complained [40] that its resources were
used up, and in propertius we already see that allusive way of dealing
with it which savours of a general satiety. but in ovid's hands the old
myths became young again, indeed, younger than ever; and people wonder
they could ever have lost their interest. his method is the reverse of
virgil's or livy's. [41] they take pains to make themselves ancient; he,
with wanton effrontery, makes the myths modern. jupiter, juno, the whole
circle of olympus, are transformed into the _hommes et femmes galantes_ of
augustus's court, and their history into a _chronique scandaleuse_. the
immoral incidents, round which a veil of poetic sanctity had been cast by
the great consecrator time, are here displayed in all their mundane
pruriency. in the _metamorphoses_ jupiter is introduced as smitten with
the love of a nymph, dictynna; some compunctions of conscience seize him,
and the image of juno's wrath daunts him, but he finally overcomes his
fear with these words--

  "hoc furtum certe coniux mea nesciet (inquit);
   aut si rescierit, sunt o sunt iurgia tanti?"

so, in the _heroides_, the idea of the desolate and love-lorn ariadne
writing a letter from the barren isle of naxos is in itself ridiculous,
nor can all the pathos of her grief redeem the irony. helen wishes she had
had more practice in correspondence, so that she might perhaps touch her
lover's chilly heart. ovid using the language of mythology, reminds us of
those heroes of dickens who preface their communications by a wink of
intelligence.

his next venture was of a more compromising character. intoxicated with
popularity, he devoted three long poems to a systematic treatment of the
_art of love_, on which he lavished all the graces of his wayward talent,
and a combination of mythological, literary, and social allusion, that
seemed to mark him out for better things. he is careful to remark at the
outset that this poem is not intended for the virtuous. the frivolous
gallants, whose sole end in life is dissipation, with the objects of their
licentious passion, are the readers for whom he caters. but he had
overshot his mark; the _amores_ had been tolerated, for they had followed
precedent. but even they had raised him enemies. the _art of love
_produced a storm of indignation, and without doubt laid the foundations
of that severe displeasure on the part of augustus, which found vent ten
years later in a terrible punishment. for ovid was doing his best to
render the emperor's reforms a dead letter. it was difficult enough to get
the laws enforced, even with the powerful sanction of a public opinion
guided by writers like horace and virgil. but here was a brilliant poet
setting his face right against the emperor's will. the necessity of
marriage had been preached with enthusiasm by two unmarried poets; a law
to the same effect had been passed by two unmarried consuls; [42] a moral
_regime_ had been inaugurated by a prince whose own morals were or had
been more than dubious. all this was difficult; but it had been done. and
now the insidious attractions of vice were flaunted in the most glowing
colours in the face of day. the young of both sexes yielded to the charm.
and what was worse, the emperor's own daughter, whom he had forced to stay
at home carding wool, to wear only such garments as were spun in the
palace, to affect an almost prudish delicacy, the proud and lovely julia,
had been detected in such profligacy as poured bitter satire on the old
monarch's moral discipline, and bore speaking witness to the power of an
inherited tendency to vice. the emperor's awful severity bespoke not
merely the aggrieved father but the disappointed statesman. julia had
disgraced his home and ruined his policy, and the fierce resentment which
rankled in his heart only waited its time to burst forth upon the man who
had laboured to make impurity attractive. [43] meanwhile ovid attempted,
two years later, a sort of recantation in the _remedia amoris_, the
frivolity of which, however, renders it as immoral as its predecessor
though less gross; and he finished his treatment of the subject with the
_medicamina faciei_, a sparkling and caustic quasi-didactic treatise, of
which only a fragment survives. [44] during this period (we know not
exactly when) was composed the tragedy of _medea_, which ancient critics
seem to have considered his greatest work. [45] alone of his writings it
showed his genius in restraint, and though _we_ should probably form a
lower estimate of its excellence, we may regret that time has not spared
it. among other works written at this time was an elegy on the death of
messala (3. a.d.), as we learn from the letters from pontus. [46] soon
after he seems, like prince henry, to have determined to turn over a new
leaf and abandon his old acquaintances. virgil, horace, and tibullus, were
dead; there was no poet of eminence to assist the emperor by his pen. ovid
was beyond doubt the best qualified by his talent, but augustus had not
noticed him. he turned to patriotic themes in order to attract favourable
notice, and began his great work on the national calendar. partly after
the example of propertius, partly by his own predilection, he kept to the
elegiac metre, though he is conscious of its betraying him into occasional
frivolous or amatory passages where he ought to be grave. [47] "who would
have thought (he says) that from a poet of love i should have become a
patriotic bard?" [48] while writing the _fasti_ he seems to have worked
also at the _metamorphoses_, a heroic poem in fifteen books, entirely
devoted to mythological stories, mostly of transformations caused by the
love or jealousy of divine wooers, or the vengeance of their aggrieved
spouses. there are passages in this long work of exceeding beauty, and a
prodigal wealth of poetical ornament, which has made it a mine for modern
poets. tasso, ariosto, guarini, spenser, milton, have all drunk deep of
this rich fountain. [49] the skill with which the different legends are
woven into the fabric of the composition is as marvellous as the frivolous
dilettantism which could treat a long heroic poem in such a way. the
_metamorphoses_ were finished before 7 a.d.; the _fasti_ were only
advanced to the end of the sixth book, when all further prosecution of
them was stopped by the terrible news, which struck the poet like a
thunderbolt, that he was ordered to leave rome forever. the cause of his
exile has been much debated. the ostensible ground was the immorality of
his writings, and especially of the _art of love_, but it has generally
been taken for granted that a deeper and more personal reason lay behind.
ovid's own hints imply that his eyes had been witness to something that
they should not, which he calls a _crimen_ (_i.e._ a crime against the
emperor). [50] the most probable theory is that augustus took advantage of
ovid's complicity in the younger julia's misconduct to wreak the full
measure of his long-standing indignation against the poet, whose evil
counsels had helped to lead astray not only her but his daughter also. he
banished him to tomi, an inhospitable spot not far from the mouth of the
danube, and remained deaf to all the piteous protestations and abject
flatteries which for ten years the miserable poet poured forth.

this punishment broke ovid's spirit. he had been the spoilt child of
society, and he had no heart for any life but that of rome. he pined away
amid the hideous solitudes and the barbarous companionship of goths and
sarmatians. his very genius was wrecked. not a single poem of merit to be
compared with those of former times now proceeded from his pen.
nevertheless he continued to write as fluently as before. now that he was
absent from his wife--for he had been thrice married--this very undomestic
poet discovered that he had a deep affection for her. he wrote her
endearing letters, and reminded her of their happy hours. as she was a
lady of high position and a friend of the empress livia, he no doubt hoped
for her good offices. but her prudence surpassed her conjugal devotion.
neither she, nor the noble and influential friends [51] whom he implored
in piteous accents to intercede for him, ever ventured to approach the
emperor on a subject on which he was known to be inexorable. and when
augustus died and tiberius succeeded, the vain hopes that had hitherto
buoyed up ovid seem to have quite faded away. from such a man it was idle
to expect mercy. so, for two or three years the wretched poet lingered on,
still solacing himself with verse, and with the kindness of the natives,
who sought by every means to do him honour and soothe his misfortune, and
then, in the sixtieth year of his age, 17 a.d., he died, and was buried in
the place of his dreary exile.

much as we may blame him, the severity of his punishment seems far too
great for his offence, since ovid is but the child of his age. in praising
him, society praised itself; as he says with natural pride, "the fame that
others gain after death, i have known in my lifetime." he was of a
thoroughly happy, thoughtless, genial temper; before his reverse he does
not seem to have known a care. his profligacy cost him no repentance; he
could not see that he had done wrong; indeed, according to the lax notions
of the time, his conduct had been above rather than below the general
standard of dissipated men. the palliations he alleges in the second book
of the _tristia_, which is the best authority for his life, are in point
of fact, unanswerable. to regard his age as wicked or degenerate never
entered into his head. he delighted in it as the most refined that the
world had ever known; "it is," he says jokingly, "the true golden age, for
every pleasure that exists may be got for gold." so wedded was he to
literary composition that he learnt the sarmatian language and wrote poems
in it in honour of augustus, the loss of which, from a philological point
of view, is greatly to be regretted. his muse must be considered as at
home in the salons find fashionable coteries of the great. though his
style is so facile, it is by no means simple. on the contrary, it is one
of the most artificial ever created, and could never have bea attained at
all but by a natural aptitude, backed by hard study, amid highly-polished
surroundings from childhood. these ovid had, and he wielded his brilliant
instrument to perfection. what euphuism was to the elizabethan courtiers,
what the _langue galante_ was to the court of louis xiv., the mythological
dialect was to the gay circles of aristocratic rome. [5]

it was select, polished, and spiced with a flavour of profanity. hence,
ovid could never be a popular poet, for a poet to be really popular must
be either serious or genuinely humorous; whereas ovid is neither. his
irony, exquisitely ludicrous to those who can appreciate it, falls flat
upon less cultivated minds, and the lack of strength that lies beneath his
smooth exterior [53] would unfit him, even if his immorality did not stand
in the way, for satisfying or even pleasing the mass of mankind.

the _ibis_ and _halieuticon_ were composed during his exile; the former is
a satiric attack upon a person now unknown, the latter a prosaic account
of the fish found in the neighbourhood of tomi.

appended to ovid's works are several graceful poems which have put forward
a claim to be his workmanship. his great popularity among the schools of
the rhetoricians both in rome and the provinces, caused many imitations to
be circulated under his name. the most ancient of these is the _nux
elegia_, which, if not ovid's, must be very shortly posterior to him; it
is the complaint of a walnut tree on the harsh treatment it has to suffer,
sometimes in very difficult verse, [54] but not inelegant. some of the
_priapeia_ are also attributed to him, perhaps with reason; the
_consolatio ad liviam_, on the death of drusus, is a clever production of
the renaissance period, full of reminiscences of ovid's verse, much as the
_ciris_ is filled with reminiscences of virgil. [55]

ovid was the most brilliant figure in a gay circle of erotic and epic
poets, many of whom he has handed down in his _epistles_, others have
transmitted a few fragments by which we can estimate their power. the
eldest was ponticus, who is also mentioned by propertius as an epic writer
of some pretensions. another was macer, whose ambition led him to group
together the epic legends antecedent and subsequent to those narrated in
the _iliad_ and _odyssey_. there was a pompeius macer, an excellent man,
who with his son committed suicide under tiberius, [56] his daughter
having been accused of high treason, and unable to clear herself. the son
is probably identical with this friend of ovid's. sabinus, another of his
intimates, who wrote answers to the _heroides_, was equally conspicuous in
heroic poetry. the title of his poem is not known. some think it was
_troezen_; [57] but the text is corrupt. ovid implies [58] that his
rescripts to the _heroides_ were complete; it is a misfortune that we have
lost them. the three poems that bear the title of _a. sabini epistolae_,
and are often bound with ovid's works, are the production of an italian
scholar of the fifteenth century. tuticanus, who was born in the same year
with ovid, and may perhaps have been the author of tibullus's third book,
is included in the last epistle from pontus [59] among epic bards.
cornelius severus, a better versifier than poet, [60] wrote a _sicilian
war_, [61] of which the first book was extremely good. in it occurred the
verses on the death of cicero, quoted by the elder seneca [62] with
approbation:

  oraque magnanimum spirantia paene virorum
  in rostris iacuere suis: sed enim abstulit omnis,
  tanquam sola foret, rapti ciceronis imago.
  tunc redeunt animis ingentia consulis acta
  iurataeque manus deprensaque foedera noxae
  patriciumque nefas extinctum: poena cethegi
  deiectusque redit votis catilina nefandis.
  quid favor aut coetus, pleni quid honoribus anni
  profuerant? sacris exculta quid artibus aetas?
  abstulit una dies aevi decus, ictaque luctu
  conticuit latiae tristis facundia linguae.
  unica sollicitis quondam tutela salusque,
  egregium semper patriae caput, ille senatus
  vindex, ille fori, legum ritusque togaeque,
  publica vox saevis aeternum obmutuit armis.
  informes voltus sparsamque cruore nefando
  canitiem sacrasque manus operumque ministras
  tantorum pedibus civis proiecta superbis
  proculcavit ovans nec lubrica fata deosque
  respexit. nullo luet hoc antonius aevo.
  hoc nec in emathio mitis victoria perse,
  nec te, dire syphax, non fecerat hoste philippo;
  inque triumphato ludibria cuncta iugurtha
  afuerant, nostraeque cadens ferus hannibal irae
  membra tamen stygias tulit inviolata sub umbras.

from these it will be seen that he was a poet of considerable power.
another epicist of some celebrity, whom quintilian thought worth reading,
was pedo albinovanus; he was also an epigrammatist, and in conversation
remarkable for his brilliant wit. there is an albinus mentioned by
priscian who is perhaps intended for him. other poets referred to in the
long list which closes the letters from pontus are rufus, largus, probably
the perfidious friend of gallus so mercilessly sketched by bekker,
camerinus, lupus, and montanus. all these are little more than names for
us. the references to them in succeeding writers will be found in teuffel.
rabirius is worth remarking for the extraordinary impression he made on
his contemporaries. ovid speaks of him as _magni rabirius oris_, [63] a
high compliment; and velleius paterculus goes so far as to couple him with
virgil as the best representative of augustan poetry! his _alexandrian
war_ was perhaps drawn from his own experience, though, if so, he must
have been a very young man at the time.

from an allusion in ovid [64] we gather that gratius [65] was a poet of
the later augustan age. his work on the chase (_cynegetica_) has come down
to us imperfect. it contains little to interest, notwithstanding the
attractiveness of its subject: but in truth all didactic poets after
virgil are without freshness, and seem depressed rather than inspired by
his success. after alluding to man's early attempts to subdue wild beasts,
first by bodily strength, then by rude weapons, he shows the gradual
dominion of reason in this as in other human actions. diana is also made
responsible for the huntsman's craft, and a short mythological digression
follows. then comes a description of the chase itself, and the implements
and weapons used in it. the list of trees fitted for spearshafts (128-
149), one of the best passages, will show his debt to the _georgics_--more
than half the lines show traces of imitation. next we have the different
breeds of dogs, their training, their diseases, and general supervision
discussed, and after a digression or two--the best being a catalogue of
the evils of luxury--the poem (as we possess it) ends with an account of
the horses best fitted for hunting. the technical details are carefully
given, and would probably have had some value; but there is scarcely a
trace of poetic enthusiasm, and only a moderate elevation of style.

the last augustan poet we shall notice is m. manilius, whose dry subject
has caused him to meet with very general neglect. his date was considered
doubtful, but jacob has shown that he began to write towards the close of
augustus's reign. the first book refers to the defeat of varus [66] (7
a.d.), to which, therefore, it must be subsequent, and the fourth book
contemplates augustus as still alive, [67] though tiberius had already
been named as his successor. [68] the fifth book must have appeared after
the interval of augustus's death; and from one passage which seems to
allude to the destruction of pompey's theatre, [69] jacob argues that it
was written as late as 22 a.d. the danger of treating a subject on which
the emperor had his own very decided views [70] may have deterred manilius
from completing his work. literature of all kinds was silent under the
tyrant's gloomy frown, and the weak style of this last book seems to
reflect the depressed mind of its author.

the birth and parentage of manilius are not known. that he was a foreigner
is probable, both from the uncouthness of his style at the outset, and
from the decided improvement in it that can be traced through succeeding
books. bentley thought him an asiatic; if so, however, his lack of florid
ornament would be strange. it is more likely that he was an african. but
the question is complicated by the corrupt state of his text, by the
obscurity of his subject, and by the very incomplete knowledge of it
displayed by the author. it was not considered necessary to have mastered
a subject to treat of it in didactic verse. cicero expressly instances
aratus [71] as a man who, with scarce any knowledge of astronomy,
exercised a legitimate poetical ingenuity by versifying such knowledge as
he had. these various causes make manilius one of the most difficult of
authors. few can wade through the mingled solecisms in language and
mistakes in science, the empty verbiage that dilates on a platitude in one
place, and the jejune abstract that hurries over a knotty argument in
another, without regretting that so unreadable a poet should have been
preserved. [72]

and yet his book is not altogether without interest. the subject is called
_astronomy_, but should rather be called _astrology_, for more than half
the space is taken up with these baseless theories of sidereal influence
which belong to the imaginary side of the science. but in the exordia and
perorations to the several books, as well as in sundry digressions, may be
found matter of greater value, embodying the poet's views on the great
questions of philosophy. [73] on the whole he must be reckoned as a stoic,
though not a strictly dogmatic one. he begins by giving the different
views as to the origin of the world, and lays it down that on these points
truth cannot be attained. the universe, he goes on to say, rests on no
material basis, much less need we suppose the earth to need one. sun,
moon, and stars, whirl about without any support; earth therefore may well
be supposed to do the same. the earth is the centre of the universe, whose
motions are circular and imitate those of the gods. [74] the universe is
not finite as some stoics assert, for its roundness (which is proved by
chrysippus) implies infinity. lucretius is wrong in denying antipodes;
they follow naturally from the globular shape, from which also we may
naturally infer that seas bind together, as well as separate, nations.
[75] all this system is held together by a spiritual force, which he calls
god, governing according to the law of reason. [76] he next describes the
zodiac and enumerates the chief stars with their influences. following the
teaching of hegesianax, [77] he declares that those which bear human names
are superior to those named after beasts or inanimate things. the study of
the stars was a gift direct from heaven. kings first, and after them
priests, were guided to search for wisdom, and now augustus, who is both
supreme ruler and supreme pontiff, follows his divine father in
cultivating this great science. mentioning some of the legends which
recount the transformations of mortals into stars, he asserts that they
must not be understood in too gross a sense. [78] nothing is more
wonderful than the orderly movement of the heavenly bodies. he who has
contemplated this eternal order cannot believe the epicurean doctrine.
human generations pass away, but the earth and the stars abide for ever.
surely the universe is divine. passing on to the milky way, he gives two
fanciful theories of its origin, one that it is the rent burnt by phaethon
through the firmament, the other that it is milk from the breast of juno.
as to its consistency, he wavers between the view that it is a closely
packed company of stars, and the more poetical one that it is formed by
the white-robed souls of the just. this last theory leads him to recount
in a dull catalogue the well-worn list of greek and roman heroes. comets
are mysterious bodies, whose origin is unknown. the universe is full of
fiery particles ever tending towards conglomeration, and perhaps their
impact forms comets. whether natural or supernatural, one thing is
certain--they are never without effect on mankind.

in the second book he begins by a complaint that the list of attractive
subjects is exhausted. this incites him to essay an untried path, from
which he hopes to reap no stolen laurels [79] as the bard of the universe!
[80] he next expounds the doctrine of an ever-present spirit moving the
mass of matter, in language reflected from the sixth aeneid. men must not
seek for mathematical demonstration. considerations of analogy are enough
to awaken conviction. the fact that, _e.g._, shell-fish are affected by
the moon, and that all land creatures depend on solar influence, should
forbid us to dissociate earth from heaven, or man's activity from the
providence of the gods. how could man have any knowledge of deity unless
he partook of its nature? the rest of the book gives a catalogue of the
different kinds of stars, their several attributes, and their astrological
classification, ending with the _dodecatemorion_ and _oclotopos_.

the third book, after a short and offensively allusive description of the
labours of preceding poets, sketches the twelve _athla_ or accidents of
human life, to each of which is assigned its special guardian influence.
it then passes to the horoscope, which it treats at length, giving minute
and various directions how to draw it. the extreme importance attached to
this process by tiberius, and the growing frequency with which, on every
occasion, chaldeans and astrologers were now consulted, made the poet
specially careful to treat this subject with clearness and precision. it
is accordingly the most readable of all the purely technical parts of the
work. the account of the tropics, with which the book closes, is
singularly inaccurate, but contains some rather elegant descriptions: [81]
at the tropic of cancer summer always reigns, at capricorn there is
perpetual winter. the book here breaks off quite abruptly; apparently he
intended to compose the epilogue at some future time, but had no
opportunity of doing it.

the exordium to the fourth book, which sometimes rises into eloquence,
glorifies fate as the ultimate divine power, but denies it either will or
personality. he fortifies his argument, according to his wont, by a
historical catalogue, which exemplifies the harshness that, except in
philosophical digressions, rarely leaves his style. then follow the
horoscopic properties of the zodiacal constellations, the various reasons
for desiring to be born under one star rather than another, a sort of
horoscopico-zodiacal account of the world, its physical geography, and the
properties of the zones. these give occasion for some graphic touches of
history and legend; the diction of this book is far superior to that of
the preceding three, but the wisdom is questionable which reserves the
"good wine" until so late. passing on to the ecliptic, he drags in the
legends of deucalion, phaethon, and others, which he treats in a
rhetorical way, and concludes the book with an appeal to man's reason, and
to the necessity of allowing the mental eye free vision. somewhat
inconsistently with the half-religious attitude of the first and second
books, he here preaches once more the doctrine of irresistible fate, which
to most of the roman poets occupies the place of god. the poem practically
ends here. he himself implies at the opening of book v., that most poets
would not have pursued the theme further; apparently he is led on by his
interest in the subject, or by the barrenness of his invention which could
suggest no other. the book, which is unfinished, contains a description of
various stars, with legends interspersed in which a more ambitious style
appears, and a taste which, though rhetorical and pedantic, is more
chastened than in the earlier books.

it will be seen from the above _resume_ that the poem discusses several
questions of great interest. rising above the technicalities of the
science, manilius tries to preach a theory of the universe which shall
displace that given by lucretius. he is a stoic combating an epicurean. a
close study of lucretius is evidenced by numerous passages, [82] and the
earnestness of his moral conclusions imitates, though it does not approach
in impressiveness, that of the great epicurean. occasionally he imitates
horace, [83] much more often virgil, and, in the legends, ovid. [84] his
technical manipulation of the hexameter is good, though tinged with
monotony. occasionally he indulges in licenses which mark a deficient ear
[85] or an imperfect comprehension of the theory of quantity. [86] he has
few archaisms, [87] few greek words, considering the exigencies of his
subject, and his vocabulary is greatly superior to his syntax; the
rhetorical colouring which pervades the work shows that he was educated in
the later taste of the schools, and neither could understand nor desired
to reproduce the simplicity of lucretius or virgil. [88]




chapter v.

prose-writers of the augustan period.


public oratory, which had held the first rank among studies under the
republic, was now, as we have said, almost extinct. in the earlier part of
augustus's reign, pollio and messala for a time preserved some of the
traditions of freedom, but both found it impossible to maintain their
position. messala retired into dignified seclusion; pollio devoted himself
to other kinds of composition. somewhat later we find messalinus, the son
of messala, noted for his eloquent pleading; but as he inherited none of
the moral qualities which had made his father dangerous, augustus
permitted him to exercise his talent. he was an intimate friend of ovid,
from whom we learn details of his life; but he frittered away his powers
on trifling jests [1] and extempore versifying. the only other name worthy
of mention is q. haterius, who from an orator became a noted declaimer.
the testimonies to his excellence vary; seneca, who had often heard him,
speaks of the wonderful volubility, more greek than roman, which in him
amounted to a fault. tacitus gives him higher praise, but admits that his
writings do not answer to his living fame, a persuasive manner and
sonorous voice having been indispensible ingredients in his oratory. [2]
the activity before given to the state was now transferred to the
basilica. but as the full sway of rhetoric was not established until quite
the close of augustus's reign, we shall reserve our account of it for the
next book, merely noticing the chief rhetoricians who flourished at this
time. the most eminent were porcius latro, fuscus arellius, and albucius
silus, who are frequently quoted by seneca; rutilius lupus, [3] who was
somewhat younger; and seneca, the father of the celebrated philosopher.
[4] fuscus was an asiatic, and seems to have been one of the first who
declaimed in latin. foreign professors had previously exercised their own
and their pupils' ingenuity in greek; cicero had almost invariably
declaimed in that language, and there can be no doubt that this was a much
less harmful practice; but now the bombast and glitter of the asiatic
style flaunted itself in the latin tongue, and found in the increasing
number of provincials from gaul and spain a body of admirers who
cultivated it with enthusiasm. cestius pius, a native of smyrna, espoused
the same florid style, and was even preferred by his audience to such men
as pollio and messala. to us the extracts from these authors, preserved in
seneca, present the most wearisome monotony, but contemporary criticism
found in them many grades of excellence. the most celebrated of all was
porcius latro, who, like seneca himself, came from spain. there is a
special character about the spanish literary genius which will be more
prominent in the next generation. at present it had not sufficiently
amalgamated with the old latin culture to shine in the higher branches.
but in the rhetorical schools it gradually leavened taste by its
attractive qualities, and men like latro must be regarded as wielding
immense influence on roman style, though somewhat in the background, much
as antipho influenced the oratory of athens.

annaeus seneca of _corduba_ (cordova), [5] the father of novatus, seneca,
and mela the father of lucan, belonged to the equestrian order, was born
probably about 54 b.c. and lived on until after the death of tiberius. [6]
the greater part of this long life, longer even than varro's, was spent in
the profession of eloquence, for which in youth he prepared himself by
studying the manner of the most renowned masters. cicero alone he was not
fortunate enough to hear, the civil wars having necessitated his
withdrawal to spain. [7] he does not appear to have visited rome more than
twice, but he shows a thorough knowledge of the rhetoricians of the
capital, whence we conclude that his residence extended over some time.
[8] the stern discipline of caesar's wars had taught the spaniards
something of roman severity, and seneca seems to have adopted with a good
will the maxims of roman life. [9] he possessed that _elan_ with which
young races often carry all before them when, they give the fresh vigour
of their understanding to master an existing system; his memory, as he
himself tells us, was so prodigious that he could recite 2000 names
correctly after once hearing them; [10] and, with the taste for showy
ornament which his race has always evinced, he must have launched himself
without misgiving into the competition of the schools. nevertheless, in
his old age, when he came to look back on his life, he felt half ashamed
of its results. his sons had asked him to write a critical account of the
greatest rhetoricians he had known; he gladly acceded to their wish, and
has embodied in his work vast numbers of extracts, drawn either from
memory or rough notes, specifying the manner in which each professor
treated his theme; he then adds his own judgment on their merits, often
interspersing the more tedious discussions with _bon-mots_ or literary
anecdotes. the most readable portions are the prefaces, where he writes in
his own person in the unaffected epistolary style. we learn from them many
particulars about the lives of the great _rhetores_ and the state of taste
and literary education. but in the preface to the tenth book (the last of
the series) he expresses an utter weariness of a subject which not even
the reminiscences of happier days could invest with serious interest.
there are no indications that seneca rose to the first eminence. his
extraordinary memory, diligence, and virtuous habits gained him respect
from his pupils and the intimacy of the great. but there is nothing in his
writings to show a man of more than average capacity, who, having been
thrown all his life in an artificial and narrowing profession, has lost
the power of taking a vigorous interest in things, and acquired the habit
of looking at questions from what we might call _the examiner's point of
view_. we have remains of two sets of compositions by him;
_controversiae_, or legal questions discussed by way of practice for
actual cases, divided into ten books, of which about half are preserved;
and _suasoriae_, or imaginary themes, such as those ridiculed by juvenal:

  "consilium dedimus sullae, privatus ut altum
  dormiret."

these last are printed first in our editions, because, being abstract in
character and not calling for any special knowledge, they were better
suited for beginners. the style of the book varies. in the prefaces it is
not inelegant, and shows few traces of the decline, but in the excerpts
from latro and fuscus, (which are perhaps nearly in their own words) we
observe the silver latinity already predominant. much is written in a very
compressed manner, reading like notes of a lecture or a table of contents.
there is, however, a geniality about the old man which renders him, even
when uninteresting, not altogether unpleasing.

we pass from rhetoric to history, and here we meet with one of the great
names of roman letters, the most eloquent of all historians, titus livius
patavinus. the exact date of his birth is disputed, but may be referred to
59 or 57 b.c. at _pataviam_ (padua), a populous and important town, no
less renowned for its strict morals than for its opulence. [11] little is
known of his life, but he seems to have been of noble birth; his relative,
c. cornelius, took the auspices at pharsalia, and the aristocratic tinge
which pervades his work would lead to the same inference. padua was a
bustling place, where public-speaking was rife, and aptitude for affairs
common; thus livy was nursed in eloquence and in scenes of human activity.
nothing tended to turn his mind to the contemplation of nature--at least
we see no signs of it in his work,--his conceptions of national
development were uncomplicated by reference to the share that physical
conditions have in moulding it; man alone, and man as in all respects
self-determining, has interest for him. his gifts are pre-eminently those
of an orator; the talent for developing an idea, for explaining events as
an orderly sequence, for establishing conclusions, for moving the
feelings, for throwing himself into a cause, for clothing his arguments in
noble language, shine conspicuous in his work, while he has the good
faith, sincerity, and patriotism which mark off the orator from the mere
advocate. for some years he remained at padua studying philosophy [12] and
practising as a teacher of rhetoric, declaiming after the manner of seneca
and his contemporaries. reference is made to these declamations by seneca
and quintilian, and no doubt they were worth preserving as a grade in his
intellectual progress and as having helped to produce the artistic
elaborateness of his speeches. in 31 b.c. or thereabouts, he came to rome,
where he speedily rose into favour. but though a courtier, he was no
flatterer. he praised brutus and cassius, [13] he debated whether caesar
was useful to the state, [14] his whole history is a praise of the old
republic, his preface states that rome can neither bear her evils, nor the
remedy that has been applied to them (by which it is probable he means the
empire), and we know that augustus called him a pompeian, though, at the
same time, he cannot have been an imprudent one, otherwise he could hardly
have retained the emperor's friendship. as regards the date of his work,
professor seeley decides that the first decade was written between 27 and
20 b.c., the very time during which the _aeneid_ was in process of
composition. the later decades were thrown off from time to time until his
death at patavium in 17 a.d. indications exist to show that they were not
revised by him after publication, _e.g._, the errors into which he had
been led by trusting to valerius antias were not erased; but he was
careful not to rely on his authority afterwards. that he enjoyed a high
reputation is clear from the fact recorded by pliny the younger, that a
man journeyed to rome from cadiz for the express purpose of seeing him,
and, having succeeded, returned at once. [15] the elder pliny [16] draws a
picture of him at an advanced age studying with undiminished zeal at his
great work. the "old man eloquent" used to say that he had written enough
for glory, and had now earned rest; but his restless mind fed on labour
and would not lie idle. when completed, his book at once became the
authoritative history of rome, after which nothing was left but to abridge
or comment upon it.

the state of letters at rome, while unfavourable to strictly political
history, was ripe for the production of a work like livy's. augustus,
agrippa, and pollio, had founded public libraries in which the older works
were accessible. the emperor took a keen interest in all studies; he
encouraged not merely poets but philologians and scientific writers, and
he was not indisposed to protect historical study, if only it were treated
in the way he approved. rabirius, pedo albinovanus, and cornelius severus
had written poems on the late wars, ovid and propertius on the legends
embodied in the calendar; the rival jurists labeo and capito had wrought
the _juris responsa_ into a body of legal doctrine; strabo was giving the
world the result of his travels in a universal geography; pompeius trogus,
labienus, pollio, and the greeks dionysius, dion, and timagenes, had all
treated roman history; augustus had published a volume of his own _gesta_;
all things seem to demand a comprehensive dramatic account of the growth
of the roman state, which should trace the process by which the world
became roman, and rome became united in the hands of caesar.

hitherto roman history had been imperfectly treated. it is unfortunate
that such crude conceptions of its nature prevailed. even cicero says,
_opus hoc unum maxime oratorium_. [17] it had been either a register of
events kept by aristocratic pontiffs from pride of race, or a series of
pictures for the display of eloquence. neither the flexible imagination,
nor the patient sagacity, nor the disinterested view of life necessary for
a great historian, was to be found among the romans. there was no true
criticism. for instance, while juvenal depicts the first inhabitants of
the city, according to tradition, as rude marauders, [18] cicero commends
their virtues and extols the wisdom of the early kings as the athenian
orators do that of solon; and in his _cato maior_ makes of the harsh
censor a refined country gentleman and a student of plato! varro had
amassed a vast collection of facts, a formidable array of authorities;
dionysius had spent twenty years in studying the monuments of rome, and
yet had so little intelligence of her past that he made romulus a
philosopher of the sophistic type! caesar and sallust gave true narratives
of that which they had themselves known, but they did little more. no
ancient writer, unless perhaps thucydides, has grasped the truth that
history is an indivisible whole, and that humanity marches according to
fixed law towards a determinate end. the world is in their eyes a stage on
which is played for ever the same drama of life and death, whose fate
moves in a circle bounded by the catastrophes of cities mortal as their
inhabitants, without man's becoming by progress of time either better or
more powerful. in estimating, then, the value of livy's work, we must ask,
how far did he possess the qualifications necessary for success? we turn
to his preface and find there the moralist, the patriot, and the stylist;
and we infer that his fullest idea of history is of a book in which he who
runs can read the lesson of virtue; and, if he be a lawgiver, can model
his legislation upon its high precedents, and, if he be a citizen, can
follow its salutary precepts of conduct. an idea, which, however noble, is
certainly not exhaustive. it may entitle its possessor to be called a
lofty writer, but not a great historian. this is his radical defect. he
treats history too little as a record, too little as a science, too much
as a series of texts for edification.

how far is he faithful to his authorities? in truth, he never deserts
them, never (or almost never) advances an assertion without them. [19] his
fidelity may be inferred from the fact that when he follows polybius
alone, he adds absolutely nothing, he merely throws life into his
predecessor's dead periods. moreover, he writes, after the method of the
old annalists, of events year by year; he rarely conjectures their causes
or traces their connexion, he is willing to efface himself in the capacity
of exponent of what is handed down. whole passages we cannot doubt,
especially in the early books, are inserted from fabius and the other
ancients, only just enough changed to make them polished instead of rude;
and it is astonishing how slight the changes need be when the hand that
makes them is a skilful one. so far as we can judge he never alters the
testimony of a witness, or colours it by interested presentation. his
chief authorities for the early history are licinius macer, claudius
quadrigarius, gn. gellius, [20] sempronius tuditanus, aelius tubero,
cassius hemina, calpurnius piso, valerius antias, acilius glabrio, [21]
porcius cato, cincius, and pictor. [22] these writers, or at least the
most ancient of them, cato and pictor, founded their investigations on
such, records as treaties, public documents--_e.g._ the annals, censors'
and pontiffs' commentaries, augural books, books relating to civil
procedure kept by the pontiffs, &c.; [23] laws, lists of magistrates, [24]
_libri lintei_ kept in the temple of juno moneta; all under the
reservation noticed before, that the majority perished in the gallic
conflagration. [25] these professor seeley classes as _pure_ sources. the
rest, which he calls _corrupt_, are the funeral orations, inscriptions in
private houses placed under the _imagines_, [26] poems of various kinds,
both _gentile_ and popular, in all of which, there was more or less of
intentional misrepresentation. for the history after the first decade new
authorities appear. the chief are polybius, silenus the sicilian a friend
of hannibal, caelius antipater, sisenna, caecilius, rutilius, and the
fasti, which are now almost or quite continuous; and still further on he
followed posidonius, and perhaps for the civil wars asinius pollio,
theophanes, and others. there is evidence that these were carefully
digested, but by instalments. for instance, he did not read polybius until
he came to write the punic wars. hence he missed several antiquarian
notices (_e.g._ the treaty with carthage) which would have helped him in
the first decade. still he uses the authors he quotes with moderation and
fidelity. when the _fasti_ omit or confuse the names of the consuls, he
tells us so; [27] when authorities differ as to whether the victory lay
with the romans or samnites, [28] he notes the fact. in the early history
he is reticent, where dionysius is minute; he is content with the broad
legendary outline, where dionysius constructs a whole edifice of probable
but utterly uncertified particulars. in the important task of sifting
authorities livy follows the plan of selecting the most ancient, and those
who from their position had best access to facts. in complicated cases of
divergence he trusts the majority, [29] the earliest, [30] or the most
accredited, [31] particularly fabius and piso. [32] he does not analyse
for us his method of arriving at a conclusion. "erudition is for him a
mine from which the historian should draw forth the pure gold, leaving the
mud where he found it." many of his conclusions are reached by a sort of
instinct, which by practice divines truth, or rather verisimilitude, which
is but too often its only available substitute.

so far as enthusiasm serves (and without it criticism, though it may
succeed in destroying, is helpless to construct), livy penetrates to the
spirit of ancient times. he says himself, in a very celebrated passage
where he bewails the prevailing scepticism, [33] "non sum nescius ab eadem
neglegentia qua nihil portendere deos volgo nunc credunt neque nuntiari
admodum ulla prodigia in publicum neque in annales referri. ceterum et
mihi vetustas res scribenti nescio quo pacto antiquus fit animus et
quaedam religio tenet, quae illi prudentissimi viri publice suscipienda
curarint, ea pro indignis habere quae in meos annales referam." this
"antiquity of soul" is not criticism, but it is an important factor in it.
in the history of the kings he is a poet. if we read the majestic sentence
in which the end of romulus is described, [34] we must admit that if the
event is told at all this is the way in which it should be told. we meet,
however, here and there, with genuine insertions from antiquity which
spoil the beauty of the picture. take, _e.g._, the law of treason, [35]
terrible in its stern accents, "duumviri perduellionem iudicent: si a
duumviris provocarit, provocatione certato: si vincent, caput obnubito:
infelici arbori reste suspendito: verberato vel intra pomoerium vel extra
pomoerium," where, as the historian remarks, the law scarcely hints at the
possibility of an acquittal. in the struggles of the young republic one
traces the risings of political passion, not of individuals as yet, but of
parties in the state. after the punic wars have begun individual features
predominate, and what has been a rich canvass becomes a speaking portrait.
constitutional questions, in which livy is singularly ill informed, are
hinted at, [36] but generally in so cursory and unintelligent a way, that
it needs a niebuhr to elicit their meaning. and livy is throughout led
into fallacious views by his confusion of the mob (_faex romuli_, as
cicero calls it) which represented the sovereign people in his day, with
the sturdy and virtuous plebs, whose obstinate insistance on their right
forms the leading thread of roman constitutional development. conformably
with his promise at the outset he traces with much more effect the
gradually increasing moral decadence. it is when rome comes into contact
with asia that her virtue, already tried, collapses almost without a
struggle. the army, once so steady in its discipline, riots in revelry,
and marches against antiochus with as much recklessness as if it were
going to butcher a flock of sheep. [37] the soldiers even disobey orders
in pillaging phocaea; they become cowards, _e.g._, the illyrian garrison
surrenders to perseus; and before long the abominable and detested
oriental orgies gain a permanent footing in rome. meanwhile, the senate
falls from its old standard, it ceases to keep faith, its generals boast
of perfidy, [38] and the corrupted fathers have not the face to check
them. [39] the epic of decadence proceeds to its _denouement_, and if we
possessed the lost books the decline would be much more evident. it must
be admitted that in this department of his subject livy paints with a
master's hand. but nothing can atone for his signal deficiency in
antiquarian and constitutional knowledge. he had (it has been said) a
taste for truth, but not a passion for it. had he gone into the _aedes
nympharum_, he might have read on brass the so-called royal and
tribunician laws; he might have read the treaties with the sabines, with
gabii and carthage; the senatus consulta and the plebi scita. augustus
found in the ruined temple of jupiter fucinus [40] the _spolia opima_ of
cossus, who was there declared to have been consul when he won them. all
the authorities represented him as military tribune. livy, it seems, never
took the trouble to examine it. when he professes to cite an ancient
document, it is not the document itself he cites but its copy in fabius.
he seems to think the style of history too ornate to admit such rugged
interpositions, [41] and when he inserts them he offers a half apology for
his boldness. this _dilettante_ way of regarding his sources deserves all
the censure niebuhr has cast on it. if it were not for the fidelity with
which he has incorporated without altering his better-informed
predecessors, the investigations of niebuhr and his successors would have
been hopelessly unverifiable. the student who wishes to learn the value of
livy for the history of the constitution should read the celebrated
lectures (vii. and viii.) of niebuhr's history. their publication
dethroned him, nor has he yet been reinstated. but it must be remembered
that this censure does not attach to him in other aspects, for instance as
a chronicler of rome's wars, or a biographer of her worthies. as a
geographer, however, he is untrustworthy; his description of hannibal's
march is obscure, and many battles are extremely involved. it is evident
he was a clear thinker only on certain points; his preface, _e.g._, is
intricate both in matter and manner.

it remains to consider him shortly as a philosophic and as an artistic
historian. on these points some excellent remarks are made by m. taine.
[42] when we read or write a history of rome we ask, why was it that rome
conquered the samnites, the carthaginians, the etruscans? how was it that
the plebeians gained equal rights with the patricians? the answer to such
questions satisfies the intelligent man of the world who desires only a
clear and consistent view. but philosophy asks a yet further _why?_ why
was rome a conquering state? why these never-ceasing wars? why was her
cult of abstract deities a worship of the letter which never rose to a
spiritual idea? in the resolution of problems like these lies the true
delight of science; the former is but information; this is knowledge. has
livy this knowledge? it does not follow that the philosophic historian
should deduce with mathematical precision; he merely narrates the events
in their proper order, or chooses from the events those that are
representative; he groups facts under their special laws, and these again
under universal laws, by a skilful arrangement or selection, or else by
flashes of imaginative insight. livy is no more a philosopher than a
critic; he discovers laws, as he verifies facts, imperfectly. the
treatment of history known to the ancients did not admit of separate
discussions summing up the results of previous narrative; for philosophic
views we are as a rule driven to consult the inserted speeches. livy's
speeches often reveal considerable insight; manlius's account of the gauls
in asia, [43] and camillus's sarcastic description of their behaviour
round rome, [44] go to the root of their national character and lay bare
its weakness. the samnites are criticised by decius in terms which show
that livy had analysed the causes of their fall before rome. [45] hannibal
arraigns the narrow policy of his country as his true vanquisher. these
and the like are as effectual means of inculcating a general truth as a
set discussion. to these numerous and perhaps more striking passages
bearing on the internal history might be added. [46] but a historian
should have his whole subject under command. it is not enough to
illuminate it by flashes. the speeches, besides being in the highest
degree unnatural and unhistoric, are far too eloquent, moving the feelings
instead of the judgment. [47] "for an annalist," to quote niebuhr, "a
clear survey is not necessary; but in a work like livy's, it is of the
highest importance, and no great author has this deficiency to such an
extent as he. he neither knew what he had written nor what he was going to
write, but wrote at hap-hazard." to put all facts on an equal footing is
to be like a child threading beads. to know how to select representative
facts, to arrange according to representative principles is an
indispensable requisite, as its absence is an irremediable defect in a
writer who aspires to instruct the world.

to turn to his artistic side. in this he has been allowed to stand on the
highest pinnacle of excellence. whether he paints the character of a
nation or an individual; whether he paints it by pausing to reflect on its
elements, as in the beautiful studies of cato and cicero, [48] or by
describing it in action, which is the poetical and dramatic mode, or by
making it express itself in speech, which is the method the orator favours
most, he is always great. he was a venetian, and niebuhr finds in him the
rich colouring of the venetian school; he has also the darker shadow which
that colouring necessitates, and the bold delineation of form which
renders it not meretricious but noble. when he makes the old senators
speak, we recognise men with the souls of kings. manlius regards the claim
of the latins for equal rights as an outrage and a sacrilege against
capitoline jupiter, with a truly roman arrogance which would be grotesque
were it not so grand. [49] the familiar conception we form in childhood of
the great roman worthies, where it does not come from plutarch, is
generally drawn from livy.

the power of his style is seen sometimes in stately movement, sometimes in
lightning-like flashes. when hannibal at the foot of the alps sees his men
dispirited, he cries out, "_you are scaling the walls of rome!_" when the
patricians shrink in fear from the dreaded tribunate, the consuls declare
that _their emblems of office are a funeral pageant_. [50] all readers
will remember pithy sentences like these: "_hannibal has grown old in
campania_;" [51] "_the issue of war will show who is in the right_." [52]

his rhetorical training discovers itself in the elaborate exactness with
which he disposes of all the points in a speech. the most artificial of
all, perhaps, and yet at the same time the most effective, is the pleading
of old horatius for his son. [53] it might have come from the hands of
porcius latro, or arellius fuscus. the orator treats truth as a means; the
historian should treat it as an end. livy wishes us not so much to know as
to admire his heroes.

his language was censured by pollio as exhibiting a _patavinitas_, but
what this was we know not. to us he appears as by far the purest writer
subsequent to cicero. of the great orator he was a warm admirer. he
imitated his style, and bade his son-in-law read only cicero and
demosthenes, or other writers in proportion as they approached these two.
he models his rhythm on the ciceronian period so far as their different
objects permit. but poetical phrases have crept in, [54] marring its even
fabric; and other indications of too rich a colouring betray the near
advent of the silver age.

as the book progresses the style becomes more fixed, until in the third
decade it has reached its highest point; in the later books, as we know
from testimony as well as the few specimens that are extant, it had become
garrulous, like that of an old man. his work was to have consisted of
fifteen decades, but as we have no epitome beyond book cxlii., it was
probably never finished. perhaps the loss of the last part is not so
serious as it seems. we have thirty books complete and the greater part of
five others; but no more, except a fragment of the ninety-first book, has
been discovered for several centuries, and in all probability the
remainder is for ever lost. livy was so much abridged and epitomized that
during the middle ages he was scarcely read in any other form. compilers
like florus, orosius, eutropius, &c. entirely supplied his place.

a word should perhaps be said about pompeius trogus, who about livy's time
wrote a universal history in forty-four books. it was called _historiae
philippicae_, and was apparently arranged according to nations; it began
with ninus, the nimrod of classical legend, and was brought down to about
9 a.d. we know the work from the epitomes of the books and from justin's
abridgment, which is similar to that of florus on livy. who justin was,
and where he lived, are not clearly ascertained. he is thought to have
been a philosopher, but if so, he was anything but a talented one; most
scholars place his _floruit_ under the antonines. he seems to have been a
faithful abbreviator, at least as far as this, that he has added nothing
of his own. hence we may form a conception, however imperfect, of the
value of trogus's labours. trogus was a scientific man, and seems to have
desired the fame of a _polymath_. in natural science he was a good
authority, [55] but though his history must have embodied immensely
extended researches, it never succeeded in becoming authoritative.

among the writers on applied science, one of considerable eminence has
descended to us, the architect vitruvius pollio. he is very rarely
mentioned, and has been confounded with vitruvius cerdo, a freedman who
belongs to a later date, and whose precepts contradict in many particulars
those of the first vitruvius. his birth-place was formiae; he served in
the african war (46 b.c.) under caesar, so that he was born at least as
early as 64 b.c. [56] the date of his work is also uncertain, but it can
be approximately fixed, for in it he mentions the emperor's sister as his
patroness, and as by her he probably means octavia, who died 11 b.c., the
book must have been written before that year. as, moreover, he speaks of
one stone theatre only as existing in rome, whereas two others were added
in 13 b.c., the date is further thrown back to at least 14 b.c. as he
expressly tells us it was written in his old age, and he must have been a
young man in 46 b.c., when he served his first campaign, the nearer we
bring its composition to the latest possible date (_i.e._ 14) the more
correct we shall probably be. he was of good birth and had had a liberal
education; but it is clear from the style of his work that he had either
forgotten how to write elegantly, or had advanced his literary studies
only so far as was necessary for a professional man. [57] his language is
certainly far from good.

he began life as a military engineer, but soon found that his personal
defects prevented him from succeeding in his career. [58] he therefore
seems to have solaced himself by setting forward in a systematic form the
principles of his art, and by finding fault with the great body of his
professional brethren. [59] the dedication to augustus implies that he had
a practical object, viz. to furnish him with sound rules to be applied in
building future edifices and, if necessary, for correcting those already
built. he is a patient student of greek authors, and adopts greek
principles unreservedly; in fact his work is little more than a compendium
of greek authorities. [60] his style is affectedly terse, and so much so
as to be frequently obscure. the contents of his book are very briefly as
follows:--

  book    i.  general description of the science--education of the
              architect--best choice of site for a city-disposition of its
              plan, fortifications, public buildings, &c.

   "     ii.  on the proper materials to be used in building, preceded,
              like several of pliny's books, by a quasi-philosophical
              digression on the origin and early history of man--the
              progress of art--vitruvius gives his views on the nature of
              matter.

   " iii. iv. on temples--an account of the four orders, doric, ionic,
              corinthian, and composite.

   "      v.  on other public buildings.

   "     vi.  on the arrangement and plan of private houses.

   "    vii.  on the internal decoration of houses.

   "   viii.  on water supply--the different properties of different
              waters--the way to find them, test them, and convey them
              into the city.

   "     ix.  on sun dials and other modes of measuring time.

   "      x.  on machines of all kinds, civil and military.

as will be seen from this analysis, the work is both comprehensive and
systematic; it was of great service in the middle ages, when it was used
in an abridged form (sufficiently ancient, however,) which we still
possess.

antiquarian research was carried on during this period with much zeal.
many illustrious scholars are mentioned, none of whose works have come
down to us, except in extremely imperfect abridgments. fenestella (52
b.c.-22 a.d.) wrote on various legal and religious questions, on
miscellaneous topics, as literary history, the art of good living, various
points in natural history, &c. for which he is quoted as an authority by
pliny. his greatest work seems to have been _annales_, which were used by
plutarch. it is probable, however, that in these he showed his special
aptitude for archaeological research, and passed over the history in a
rapid sketch. special grammatical studies were carried on by verrius
flaccus, a freedman, whose great work, _de verborum significatu_, the
first latin lexicon conducted on an extensive scale, we possess in an
abridgment by festus. its size may be conjectured from the fact that the
letter a occupied four books, p five, and so on; and that festus's
abridgment consisted of twenty large volumes. [61] it was a rich
storehouse of knowledge, the loss of which is much to be lamented. another
freedman, c. julius hyginus (64 b.c.-16 a.d.?), who was also keeper of
augustus's library on the palatine, manifested an activity scarcely less
encyclopaedic than that of varro. of his multifarious works we possess two
short treatises which pass under his name, the first on mythology, called
_fabulae_, a series of extracts from his _genealogiae_, which we have in
an abridgment; the second on astronomy, extending, though this is also in
an abridged form, to four books. a few details of his life are given by
suetonius. he was a spaniard by birth, though some believed him to be an
alexandrian, since caesar brought him to rome after the alexandrine war;
he attended at rome the lectures of the grammarian cornelius alexander,
surnamed polyhistor. he was an intimate acquaintance of ovid, [62] and is
said to have died in great poverty. it is doubtful whether the works we
possess were written by him in his youth, or are the production of an
imperfectly educated abbreviator. bursian, quoted by teuffel, [63] thinks
it probable that in the second half of the second century of the christian
era, a grammarian made a very brief abridgment of hyginus's work entitled
_genealogiae_, and to this added a treatise on the whole mythology so far
as it concerned poetical literature, compiled from good sources. this
mythology, which retained the name of hyginus and the title of
_genealogiae_, came to be generally used in the schools of the
grammarians.

the demand for school-books was now rapidly increasing; and as the great
classical authors published their works, an abundant supply of material
was given to the ingenious and learned. the _grammaticae tribus_, whom
horace mentions with such disdain, [64] were already asserting their right
to dispense literary fame. they were not as yet so compact or popular a
body as the rhetoricians, but they had begun to cramp, as the others had
begun to corrupt, literature. dependence on the opinion of a clique is the
most hurtful state possible, even though the clique be learned; and horace
showed wisdom as well as spirit in resisting it. the endeavour to please
the leading men of the world, which horace professed to be his object, is
far less narrowing; such men, though unable to appraise scientific merit,
are the best judges of general literature.

the careful methods of exact inquiry, were, as we have said, directed also
to law, in which labeo remained the highest authority. capito abated
principle in favour of the imperial prerogative. they did not, however,
affect philosophy, which retained its original colouring as an _ars
vivendi_. many of horace's friends, as we learn from the _odes_, gave
their minds to speculative inquiry, but, like the poet himself, they seem
to have soon deserted it. at least we hear of no original investigations.
neither a metaphysic nor a psychology arose; only a loose rhetorical
treatment of physical questions, and a careful collection of ethical
maxims for the most part eclectically obtained.

sextius pythagoreus--there were two born of this name, father and son--
wrote in greek, reproducing the oracular style of heraclitus. the
_gnuomai_, which were translated and christianised by rufinus, were
stamped with a strongly theistic character. a few inferior thinkers are
mentioned by quintilian and seneca, as papirius fabianus, sergius flavius,
and plotius crispinus. of these, papirius treated some of the
classificatory sciences, which now first began to attract interest in
rome. botany and zoology were the favourites. mineralogy excited more
interest on its commercial side with regard to the value and history of
jewels; it was also treated in a mystic or imaginative way.

from this rapid summary it will be seen that real learning  still
flourished in rome. despotism had not crushed intellectual energy, nor
enforced silence on all but flatterers. the emperor had nevertheless grown
suspicious in his old age, and given indications of that tyranny which was
soon to be the rule of government; he had interdicted timagenes from his
palace, banished ovid, burnt the works of labienus, exiled severus, and
shown such severity towards albucius silo that he anticipated further
disgrace by a voluntary death. his reign closed in 14 a.d., and with it
ceases for near a century the appearance of the highest genius in rome.


appendix

note i.--_a fragment translated from seneca's suasoriae, showing the style
of expression cultivated in the schools._

the subject (suas. 2) debated is whether the 300 spartans at thermopylae,
seeing themselves deserted by the army, shall remain or flee. the
different rhetors declaim as follows, making leonidas the speaker:--

_arellius fuscus_.--what! are our picked ranks made up of raw recruits, or
spirits likely to be cowed, or hands likely to shrink from the
unaccustomed steel, or bodies enfeebled by wounds or decay? how shall i
speak of us as the flower of greece? shall i bestow that name on spartans
or eleans? or shall i rehearse the countless battles of our ancestors, the
cities they sacked, the nations they spoiled? and do men now dare to boast
that our temples need no walls to guard them? ashamed am i of our conduct
ashamed to have entertained even the idea of flight. but then, you say,
xerxes comes with an innumerable host. o spartans! and spartans matched
against barbarians, have you no reverence for your deeds, your grandsires,
your sires, from whose example your souls from infancy gather lofty
thoughts? i scorn to offer spartans such exhortations as these. look! we
are protected by our position. though he bring with him the whole east,
and parade his useless numbers before our craven eyes, this sea which
spreads its vast expanse before us is pressed into a narrow compass, is
beset by treacherous straits which scarce admit the passage of a single
row-boat, and then by their chopping swell make rowing impossible; it is
beset by unseen shallows, wedged between deeper bottoms, rough with sharp
rocks, and everything that mocks the sailor's prayer. i am ashamed (i
repeat it) that spartans, and spartans armed, should even stop to ask how
it is they are safe. shall i not carry home the spoil of the persians?
then at least i will fall naked upon it. they shall know that we have yet
three hundred men who thus scorn to flee, who thus mean to fall. think of
this: we can perhaps conquer; with all our effort we cannot be conquered.
i do not say you are doomed to death--you to whom i address these words;
but if you are, and yet think that death is be feared, you greatly err. to
no living thing has nature given unending life; on the day of birth the
day of death is fixed. for heaven has wrought us out of a weak material;
our bodies yield to the slightest stroke, we are snatched away unwarned by
fate. childhood and youth lie beneath the same inexorable law. most of us
even long for death, so perfect a rest does it offer from the struggle of
life. but glory has no limits, and they who fall like us rise nearest to
the gods. even women often choose the path of death which leads to glory.
what need to mention lycurgus, those heroes handed down by history, whom
no peril could appal? to awake the spirit of othryades alone, would be to
give example enough, and more than enough, for us three hundred men!

_triarius_.--are not spartans ashamed to be conquered, not by blows but by
rumours? 'tis a great thing to be born a scion of valour and a spartan.
for certain victory all would wait; for certain death none but spartans.
sparta is girt with no walls, her walls are where her men are. better to
call back the army than to follow them. what if the persian bores through
mountains, makes the sea invisible? such proud felicity never yet stood
sure; the loftiest exaltation is struck to earth through its forgetfulness
of the instability of all things human. you may be sure that power which
has given rise to envy has not seen its last phase. it has changed seas,
lands, nature itself; let us three hundred die, if only that it may here
find something it cannot change. if such madmen's counsel was to be
accepted, why did we not flee with the crowd?

_porcius latro_.--this then is what we have waited for, to collect a band
of runaways. you flee from a rumour; let us at least know of what sort it
is. our dishonour can hardly be wiped out even by victory; bravely as we
may fight, successful as we may be, much of our renown is already lost;
for spartans have debated whether or not to flee. o that we may die! for
myself, after this discussion, the only thing i fear is to return home.
old women's tales have shaken the arms out of our hands. now, now, let us
fight, among the thirty thousand our valour might have lain hid. the rest
have fled. if you ask my opinion, which i utter for the honour of
ourselves and greece, i say they have not deserted us, they have chosen us
as their champions.

_marillus_.--this was our reason for remaining, that we might not be
hidden among the crowd of fugitives. the army has a good excuse to offer
for its conduct: "we knew thermopylae would be safe since we left spartans
to guard it."

_cestius pius_.--you have shown, spartans, how base it were to fly by so
long remaining still. all have their privilege. the glory of athens is
speech, of thebes religion, of sparta arms. 'tis for this eurotas flows
round our state that its stream may inure our boys to the hardships of
future war; 'tis for this we have our peaks of taygetus inaccessible but
to spartans; 'tis for this we boast of a hercules who has won heaven by
merit; 'tis for this that arms are our only walls. o deep disgrace to our
ancestral valour! spartans are counting their numbers, not their manhood.
let us see how long the list is, that sparta may have, if not brave
soldiers, at least true messengers. can it be that we are vanquished, not
by war, but by reports? that man, i' faith, has a right to despise
everything at whose very name spartans are afraid. if we may not conquer
xerxes, let us at least be allowed to see him; i would know what it is i
flee from. as yet i am in no way like an athenian, either in seeking
culture, or in dwelling behind a wall; the last athenian quality that i
shall imitate will be cowardice.

_pompeius silo_.--xerxes leads many with him, thermopylae can hold but
few. we shall be the most timid of the brave, the slowest of cowards. no
matter how great nations the east has poured into our hemisphere, how many
peoples xerxes brings with him; as many as this place will hold, with
those is our concern.

_cornelius hispanus_.--we have come for sparta; let us stay for greece;
let us vanquish the foe as we have already vanquished our friends; let
this arrogant barbarian learn that nothing is so difficult as to cut an
armed spartan down. for my part, i am glad the rest have gone; they have
left thermopylae for us; there will now be nothing to mingle or compare
itself with our valour; no spartan will be hidden in the crowd; wherever
xerxes looks he will see none but spartans.

_blandus_.--shall i remind you of your mother's command--"either with your
shield or on it?" and yet to return without arms is far less base than to
flee under arms. shall i remind you of the words of the captive?--"kill
me, i am no slave!" to such a man to escape would not have been to avoid
capture. describe the persian terrors! we heard all that when we were
first sent out. let xerxes see the three hundred, and learn at what rate
the war is valued, what number of men the place is calculated to hold. we
will not return even as messengers except after the fight is over. who has
fled i know not; these men sparta has given me for comrades. i am thankful
that the host has fled; they had made the pass of thermopylae too narrow
for me to move in.

s _on the other side_.

_cornelius hispanus_.--i hold it a great disgrace to our state if xerxes
see no greeks before he sees the spartans. we shall not even have a
witness of our valour; the enemy's account of us will be believed. you
have my counsel, it is the same as that of all greece. if any one advise
differently, he wishes you to be not brave men but ruined men.

_claudius marcellus_.--they will not conquer us; they will overwhelm us.
we have been true to our renown, we have waited till the last. nature
herself has yielded before we.

the above _suasoria_ is by no means one of the most brilliant; on the
contrary, it is a decidedly a tame one, but it is a good instance of an
ordinary declamation of the better sort, and gives passages from most of
the rhetoricians to whom reference is made in the text.


note ii.--_a few observations on the treatment of rhetorical questions,
taken from the third book of quintilian._

"the division of the departments of rhetoric, or to use a more correct
term, the classification of causes, is three-fold: they are either
laudatory, deliberative, or judicial. this is a division according to the
subject matter, not according to the artistic treatment. correspondingly,
there are three requisites for pleading well, nature, art, and practice;
and three objects which the orator must set before him, to teach, to move,
and to delight. every question turns either on things or on words; or as
it may be expressed in other language, is either indefinite or definite.
the _indefinite_ is in the form of a universal proposition (_oesis_) which
cicero calls _propositum_, others _quaestio universalis civilis_, others
_quaestio philosopho conveniens_, and athenaeus _pars causae_. this again
is divided under the heads of knowledge and action respectively; of
knowledge, _e.g. is the world ruled by providence?_ of action, _e.g., is
political activity a duty?_ the _definite_ question regards things,
persons, times, circumstances: it is called _upothesis_ in greek, _causa_
in latin. it always depends on an indefinite question, _e.g., ought cato
to marry?_ depends on the wider one, _is marriage desirable?_ hence it may
be a _suasoria_. and this is true even of cases in which no person is
specially mentioned, _e.g._, the question, _ought a man to hold office
under a tyranny?_ depends on the wider one, _ought a man to hold office at
all?_ and this question refers of necessity to some special tyrant, though
it may not mention him by name. this is the same division as that into
_general_ and _special_ questions. thus every special includes a general.
it is true that generals often bear only remotely on practice, and
sometimes are altogether neutralised by peculiar circumstances, _e.g._,
the question, _is political activity a duty?_ becomes inapplicable to a
chronic invalid. still, all are not of this kind, _e.g., is virtue the end
of man?_ is equally applicable to every human being, whatever his
capacity. cicero in his earlier treatises disapproved of these questions
being discussed by the orator; he wished to leave them to the philosopher;
but as he grew in experience he changed his mind.

"a cause is defined by valgius, after apollodorus, as _negotium omnibus
suis partibus spectans ad quaestionem_, or as _negotium cuius finis est
controversia_. the _negotium_ (or business in hand) is thus defined,
_congregatio personarum locorum temporum causarum modorum casuum factorum
instrumentorum sermonum scriptorum et non scriptorum_. the cause,
therefore, corresponds to the greek _upostasis_ (subject), the _negotium_
to _peristasis_ (surroundings). these are of course closely connected; and
many have defined the cause as though it were identical with its
surroundings or conditions.

"in every discussion three things are the objects of inquiry, _an sit_, is
it so? _quid sit_, if so, what is it? _quale sit_, of what kind is it? for
first, there must _be_ something, about which the discussion has arisen.
till this is made clear no discussion as to what it is can arise; far less
can we determine what its qualities are, until this second point is
ascertained. these three objects of inquiry are exhaustive; on them every
question, whether definite or indefinite, depends. the accuser will try to
establish, first, the occurrence of the act in dispute, then its
character; and, lastly, its criminality. the advocate will, if possible,
deny the fact; if he cannot do that he will prove that it is not what the
accuser states it to be; or, thirdly, he may contend--and this is the most
honourable kind of defence--that it was rightly done. as a fourth
alternative, he may take exception to the legality of the prosecution. all
these, and every other conceivable division of questions, come under the
two general heads (_status_) of _rational_ and _legal_. the rational is
simple enough, depending only on the contemplation of nature; thus it is
content with exhibiting conjecture, definition, and quality. the legal is
extremely complex, laws being infinite in number and character. sometimes
the letter is to be observed, sometimes the spirit. sometimes we get at
its meaning by comparison, or induction; sometimes its meaning is open to
the most contradictory interpretations. hence there is room for a far
greater display of diverse kinds of excellence in the _legal_ than in the
_rational_ department. thus the declamatory exercises called _suasoriae_,
which are confined to _rational_ considerations, are fittest for young
students whose reasoning powers are acute, but who have not the knowledge
of law necessary for enabling them to treat _controversiae_ which hinge on
legal questions. these last are intended as a preparation for the pleading
of actual causes in court, and should be regularly practised even by the
most accomplished pleader during the spare moments that his profession
allows him."




book iii.

the decline.
_from the accession of tiberius to the death of m. aurelius_ (14-180 a.d.)


chapter i

the age of tiberius (14-37 a.d.).


augustus was not more unlike his gloomy successor than were the writers
who flourished under him to those that now come before us. the history of
literature presents no stronger contrast than between the rich fertility
of the last epoch and the barrenness of the present one. the age of
tiberius forms an interval of silence during which the dead are buried,
and the new generation prepares itself to appear. under nero it will have
started forth in all its panoply of tinsel armour; at present the seeds
that will produce it are being sown by the hand of despotism. [1]

the sudden collapse of letters on the death of augustus is easily
accounted for. as long as the chief of the state encouraged them labourers
in every field were numerous. when his face was withdrawn the stimulus to
effort was removed. thus, even in augustus's time, when ill health and
disappointment had soured his nature and disposed him to arbitrary
actions, literature had felt the change. the exile of ovid was a blow to
the muses. we have seen how it injured his own genius, a decline over
which he mourns, knowing the cause but impotent to overcome it. [2] we
have seen also how it was followed up by other harsh measures, stifling
the free voice of poets and historians. and when we reflect how the
despotism was entwining itself round the entire life of the nation,
gathering by each new enactment food for future aggression, and only
veiled as yet by the mildness or caution of a prince whose one object was
to found a dynasty, our surprise is lessened at the spectacle of
literature prostrate and dumb, threatened by the hideous form of tyranny
now no longer in disguise, offering it with brutal irony the choice
between submission, hypocrisy, and death. tiberius (whose portrait drawn
by tacitus in colours almost too dark for belief, is nevertheless rendered
credible by the deathlike silence in which his reign was passed) had in
his youth shown both taste and proficiency in liberal studies. he had
formed his style on that of messala, but the gloomy bent of his mind led
him to contract and obscure his meaning to such a degree that, unlike most
romans, he spoke better extempore [3] than after preparation. in the art
of perplexing by ambiguous phrases, of indicating intentions without
committing himself to them, he was without a rival. in point of language
he was a purist like augustus; but unlike him he mingled archaisms with
his diction. while at rhodes he attended the lectures of theodorus; and
the letters or speeches of his referred to by tacitus indicate a nervous
and concentrated style. poetry was alien from his stern character.
nevertheless, suetonius tells us he wrote a lyric poem and greek
imitations of euphorion, rhianus, and parthenius; but it was the minute
questions of mythology that chiefly attracted him, points of useless
erudition like those derided by juvenal: [4]

  "nutricem anchisae, nomen patriamque novercae
  anchemoli, dicat quot acestes vixerit annos,
  quot siculus phrygibus vini donaverit urnas."

in maturer life he busied himself with writing memoirs, which formed the
chief, almost the only study of domitian, and of which we may regret that
time has deprived us. the portrait of this arch dissembler by his own able
hand would be a good set off to the terrible indictment of tacitus.
besides the above he was the author of funeral speeches, and, according to
suidas, of a work on the art of rhetoric.

with these literary pretensions it is clear that his discouragement of
letters as emperor was due to political reasons. he saw in the free
expression of thought or fancy a danger to his throne. and as the
abominable system of _delations_ made every chance expression penal, and
found treason to the present in all praise of the past, the only resource
open to men of letters was to suppress every expression of feeling, and,
by silent brooding, to keep passion at white heat, so that when it speaks
at last it speaks with the concentrated intensity of a juvenal or a
tacitus.

we might ask how it was that authors did not choose subjects outside the
sphere of danger. there were still forms of art and science which had not
been worked out. the _natural history_ of pliny shows how much remained to
be done in fields of great interest. neither philosophy nor the lighter
kinds of poetry could afford matter for provocation. but the answer is
easy. the roman imagination was so narrow, and their constructive talent
so restricted, that they felt no desire to travel beyond the regular
lines. it seemed as if all had been done that could be done well. history,
national and universal, [5] science [6] and philosophy, [7] greek poetry
in all its varied forms, had been brought to perfection by great masters
whom it was hopeless to rival. the age of literary production seemed to
have been rounded off, and the self-consciousness that could reflect on
the new era had not yet had time to arise. rhetoric, as applied to the
expression of political feeling, was the only form which literature cared
to take, and that was precisely the form most obnoxious to the government.

thus it is possible that even had tiberius been less jealously repressive
letters would still have stagnated. the severe strain of the augustan age
brought its inevitable reaction. the simultaneous appearance of so many
writers of the first rank rendered necessary an interval during which
their works were being digested and their spirit settling down into an
integral constituent of the national mind. by the time thought reawakens,
virgil, horace, and livy are already household words, and their works the
basis of all literary culture.

in reading the lives of the chief post-augustan writers we are struck by
the fact that many, if not most of them, held offices of state. the desire
for peaceful retirement, characteristic of the early augustans, the
contentment with lettered leisure that signalises the poetry of the later
augustans, have both given place to a restless excitement, and to a
determination to make the most of literature as an aid to a successful
career. hitherto we have observed two distinct classes of writers, and a
corresponding double relation of politics and literature. the early poets,
and again those of augustus's era, were not men of affairs, they belonged
to the exclusively literary class. the great prose writers on the contrary
rose to political eminence by political conduct. literature was with them
a relaxation, and served no purpose of worldly aggrandisement. now,
however, an unhealthy confusion between the two provinces takes place. a
man rises to office through his poems or rhetorical essays. the
acquirements of a professor become a passport to public life. seneca and
quintilian are striking and favourable instances of the school door
opening into the senate:

  "si fortuna volet fies de rhetore consul." [8]

but nearly all the chief writers carried their declamatory principles into
the serious business of life. this double aspect of their career produced
two different types of talent, under one or other of which the great
imperial writers may be ranged. excluding men of the second rank, we have
on the one side lucan, juvenal, and tacitus, all whose minds have a strong
political bias, the bias of old rome, which makes them the most powerful
though the most prejudiced exponents of their times. of another kind are
persius, seneca, and pliny the elder. their genius is contemplative and
philosophical; and though two of them were much mixed in affairs, their
spirit is cosmopolitan rather than national, and their wisdom, though
drawn from varied sources, cannot be called political. these six are the
representative minds of the period on which we are now entering, and
between them reflect nearly all the best and worst features of their age.
quintilian, statius, and pliny the younger, represent a more restricted
development; the first of them is the typical rhetorician, but of the
better class; the second is the brilliant improvisatore and ingenious
word-painter; the third the cultivated and amiable but vain, common-place,
and dwarfed type of genius which under the empire took the place of the
"fine gentlemen" of the free republic.

writers of this last stamp cannot be expected to show any independent
spirit. they are such as in every age would adopt the prevalent fashion,
and theorise within the limits prescribed by respectability. while a bad
emperor reigns they flatter him; when a good emperor succeeds they flatter
him still more by abusing his predecessor; at the same time they are
genial, sober, and sensible, adventuring neither the safety of their necks
nor of their intellectual reputation.

such an author comes before us in m. velleius paterculus, the court
historian of tiberius. this well-intentioned but loquacious writer gained
his loyalty from an experience of eight years' warfare under tiberius in
various parts of europe, and the flattery of which he is so lavish was
probably sincere. his birth may perhaps be referred to 18 b.c., since his
first campaign, under m. vinicius, to whose son he dedicated his work,
took place in the year 1 b.c. tiberius's sterling qualities as a soldier
gained him the friendship of many of his legati, and velleius was
fortunate enough to secure that of tiberius in return. by his influence he
rose through the minor offices to the praetorship (14 a.d.), and soon
after set himself to repair the deficiencies of a purely military
education by systematic study. the fruit of this labour is the _abridgment
of roman history_, in two books, a mere rapid survey of the early period,
becoming more diffuse as it nears his own time, and treating the life of
tiberius and the events of which he was the centre with considerable
fulness. the latter part is preserved entire; of the first book, which
closes with the destruction of carthage, a considerable portion has been
lost. as, however, he is not likely to have followed in it any authorities
inaccessible to us, the loss is unimportant. for his work generally the
authorities he quotes are good--cato's _origines_, the _annales_ of
hortensius, and probably atticus's abridgment; cornelius nepos, and trogus
for foreign, livy and sallust (of whom he was a great admirer) for
national, history. as a recipient and expectant of court favour, he
naturally echoed the language of the day. brutus and cassius are for him
parricides; caesar, the divine founder of an era which culminates in the
divine tiberius. [9] so full was he of his master's praises that he
intended to write a separate book on the subject, but was prevented by his
untimely death. this took place in 31 a.d., when the discovery of
sejanus's conspiracy caused many suspected to be put to death, and it
seems that velleius was among the number.

his blind partisanship naturally obscures his judgment; but, making
allowance for a defect which he does not attempt to conceal, the reader
may generally trust him for all matters of fact. his studies were not as a
rule deep; but an exception must be made in the case of his account of the
greek colonies in italy, the dates at which they were founded, and their
early relations with rome. these had never been so clearly treated by any
writer, at least among those with whom we are familiar. his mind is not of
a high order; he can neither sift evidence nor penetrate to causes; his
talents lie in the biographical department, and he has considerable
insight into character. his style is not unclassical so far as the
vocabulary goes, but the equable moderation of the golden age is replaced
by exaggeration, and like all who cultivate artificial brilliancy, he
cannot maintain his ambitious level of poetical and pretentious ornament.
the last year referred to in the book is 30 a.d. the dearth of other
material gives him additional value. as a historian he takes a low rank;
as an abridger he is better, but best of all as a rhetorical anecdotist
and painter of character in action.

a better known writer (especially during the middle ages) is valerius
maximus, author of the _facta et dicta memorabilia_, in nine books,
addressed to tiberius in a dedication of unexampled servility, [10] and
compiled from few though good sources. the object of the work is stated in
the preface. it was to save labour for those who desired to fortify their
minds with examples of excellence, or increase their knowledge of things
worth knowing. the methodical arrangement by subjects, _e.g._, religion,
which is divided into religion observed and religion neglected, and
instances of both given, first from roman, then from foreign, history, and
so on with all the other subjects, makes teuffel's suggestion extremely
probable, namely, that it was intended for the use of young declaimers,
who were thus furnished with instances for all sorts of themes. the
constant tendency in the imperial literature to exhaust a subject by a
catalogue of every known instance may be traced to these pernicious
rhetorical handbooks. if a writer praises temperance, he supplements it by
a list of temperate romans; if he describes a storm, he _puts down_ all he
knows about the winds. uncritical as valerius is, and void of all thought,
he is nevertheless pleasant enough reading for a vacant hour, and if we
were not obliged to rate him by a lofty standard, would pass muster very
well. but he is no fit company for men of genius; our only wonder is he
should have so long survived. his work was a favourite school-book for
junior classes, and was epitomised or abridged by julius paris in the
fourth or fifth century. at the time of this abridgment the so-called
tenth book must have been added. julius paris's words in his preface to it
are, _liber decimus de praenominibus et similibus_: but various
considerations make it certain that valerius was not the author. [11] many
interesting details were given in it, taken chiefly from varro; and it is
much to be regretted that the entire treatise is not preserved. besides
paris one titius probus retouched the work in a still later age, and a
third abstract by januarius nepotianus is mentioned. this last writer cut
out all the padding which valerius had so largely used ("_dum se ostentat
sententiis, locis iactat, fundit excessibus_"), and reduced the work to a
bare skeleton of facts.

a much more important writer, one of whose treatises only has reached us,
was a. cornelius celsus. he stood in the first rank of roman scientists,
was quite encyclopaedic in his learning, and wrote, like cato, on
eloquence, law, farming, medicine, and tactics. there is no doubt that the
work on medicine (extending over books vi.-xiii. of his encyclopaedia)
which we possess, was the best of his writings, but the chapters on
agriculture also are highly praised by columella.

at this time, as des etangs remarks, nearly all the knowledge and practice
of medicine was in the hands of greek physicians, and these either
freedmen or slaves. roman practitioners seem to have inspired less
confidence even when they were willing to study. habits of scientific
observation are hereditary; and for centuries the greeks had studied the
conditions of health and the theory of disease, as well as practised the
empirical side of the art, and most romans were well content to leave the
whole in their hands.

celsus tried to attract his countrymen to the pursuit of medicine by
pointing out its value and dignity. he commences his work with a history
of medical science since its first importation into greece, and devotes
the rest of book i. to a consideration of dietetics and other
prophylactics of disease; the second book treats of general pathology, the
third and fourth of special illnesses, the fifth gives remedies and
prescriptions, the sixth, seventh, and eighth--the most valuable part of
the book--apply themselves chiefly to surgical questions. the value of his
work consists in the clear, comprehensive grasp of his subject, and the
systematic way in which he expounds its principles. the main points of his
theory are still valid; very few essentials need to be rejected; it might
still be taken as a popular handbook on the subject. he writes for roman
citizens, and is therefore careful to avoid abstruse terms where plain
ones will do, and greek words where latin are to be had. the style is
bare, but pure and classical. an excellent critic says [12]--"quo saepius
eum perlegebam, eo magis me detinuit cum dicendi nitor et brevitas tum
perspicacitas iudicii sensusque vorax et ad agendum accommodatus, quibus
omnibus genuinam repraesentat nobis civis romani imaginem." the text as we
have it depends on a single ms. and sadly needs a careful revision; it is
interpolated with numerous glosses, both greek and latin, which a skilful
editor would detect and remove. among the other treatises in his
_encyclopaedia_, next to that on farming, those on rhetoric and tactics
were most popular. the former, however, was superseded by quintilian, the
latter by vegetius. in philosophy he did not so much criticise other
schools as detail his own views with concise eloquence. these views were
almost certainly eclectic, though we know on quintilian's authority that
he followed the two sextii in many important points. [13]

the other branches of prose composition were almost neglected in this
reign. even rhetoric sank to a low level; the splendid displays of men
like latro, arellius, and ovid gave place to the flimsy ostentation of
remmius palaemon. this dissolute man, who combined the professions of
grammarian and rhetorician, possessed an extraordinary aptitude for fluent
harangue, but soon confined his attention to grammatical studies, in which
he rose to the position of an authority. suetonius says he was born a
slave, and that while conducting his young master to school he learnt
something of literature, was liberated, and set up a school in rome, where
he rose to the top of his profession. although infamous for his abandoned
profligacy, and stigmatized by tiberius and claudius as utterly unfit to
have charge of the young, he managed to secure a very large number of
pupils by his persuasive manner, and the excellence of his tutorial
method. his memory was prodigious, his eloquence seductive, and a power of
extempore versification in the most difficult metres enhanced the charm of
his conversation. he is referred to by pliny, quintilian, and juvenal, and
for a time superintended the studies of the young satirist persius.

oratory, as may easily be supposed, had well nigh ceased. votienus
montanus, mamercus scaurus, and p. vitellius, all held high positions in
the state. scaurus, in particular, was also of noble lineage, being the
great-grandson of the celebrated chief of the senate. his oratory was
almost confined to declamation, but was far above the general level of the
time. careless, and often full of faults, it yet carried his hearers away
by its native power and dignity. [14] asinius gallus, the son of pollio,
so far followed his father as to take a strong interest in politics, and
with filial enthusiasm compared him favourably with cicero. domitius afer
also is mentioned by tacitus as an able but dissolute man, who under a
better system might have been a good speaker.  a writer of some mark was
cremutius cordus, whose eloquent account of the rise of the empire cost
him his life: in direct defiance of the fashionable cant of the day he had
called cassius "the last of the romans." the higher spirits seemed to take
a gloomy pleasure in speaking out before the tyrant, even if it were only
with their last breath; more than one striking instance of this is
recorded by tacitus; and though he questions the wisdom of relieving
personal indignation by a vain invective, which must bring death and ruin
on the speaker and all his family, and in the end only tighten the yoke it
tries to shake, yet the intractable pride of these representatives of the
old families has something about it to which, human as we are, we cannot
refuse our sympathy. the only other prose-writer we need mention is
aufidius bassus, who described the civil wars and the german expeditions,
and is mentioned with great respect by tacitus.

poetry is represented by the fifth book of manilius, by phaedrus's
_fables_, and perhaps by the translation of aratus ascribed to germanicus,
the nephew and adopted son of tiberius. this translation, which is both
elegant and faithful, and superior to cicero's in poetical inspiration,
has been claimed, but with less probability, for domitian, who, as is well
known, affected the title of germanicus. [15] but the consent of the most
ancient critics tends to restore germanicus drusus as the author, the
title _genitor_ applied to tiberius not being proof positive the other
way.

the only writer who mentions phaedrus is martial, [16] and he only in a
single passage. the aesopian beast-fable was a humble form of art
peculiarly suited to a period of political and literary depression. seneca
in his _consolatio ad polybium_ implies that that imperial favourite had
cultivated it with success. apparently he did not know of phaedrus; and
this fact agrees with the frequent complaints that phaedrus makes to the
effect that he is not appreciated. of his life we know only what we can
gather from his own book. he was born in pieria, and became the slave of
augustus, who set him free, and seems to have given him his patronage. the
poet was proud of his greek birth, but was brought to rome at so early an
age as to belong almost equally to both nationalities. his poverty [17]
did not secure him from persecution, sejanus, ever suspicious and
watchful, detected the political allusions veiled beneath the disguise of
fable, and made the poet feel his auger. the duration of phaedrus's career
is uncertain. the first two books were all that he published in tiberius's
reign; the third, dedicated to eutychus, and the fourth to particulo,
claudius's favourite, clearly show that he continued to write over a
considerable time. the date of book v. is not mentioned, but it can hardly
be earlier than the close of claudius's reign. thus we have a period of
nearly thirty years during which these five short books were produced.

like all who con over their own compositions, phaedrus had an unreasonably
high opinion of their merit. literary reputation was his chief desire, and
he thought himself secure of it. he echoes the boast so many greater men
have made before him, that he is the first to import a form of greek art;
but he limits his imitation to the general scope, reserving to himself the
right to vary the particular form in each fable as he thinks fit. [18] the
careful way in which he defines at what point his obligations to aesop
cease and his own invention begins, shows him to have had something of the
trifler and a great deal of the egotist. his love of condensation is
natural, for a fabulist should be short, trenchant, and almost proverbial
in his style; but phaedrus carries these to the point of obscurity and
enigma. it seems as if at times he did not see his drift himself. to this
fault is akin the constant moralising tone which reflects rather than
paints, enforces rather than elicits its lesson. he is himself a small
sage, and all his animals are small sages too. they have not the life-like
reality of those of aesop; they are mere lay figures. his technical skill
is very considerable; the iambic senarius becomes in his hands an
extremely pleasing rhythm, though the occurrence of spondees in the second
and fourth place savours of archaic usage. his diction is hardly varied
enough to admit of clear reference to a standard, but on the whole it may
be pronounced nearer to the silver than the golden latinity, especially in
the frequent use of abstract words. his confident predictions of
immortality were nearly being falsified by the burning, by certain
zealots, of an abbey in france, where alone the ms. existed (1561 a.d.);
but phaedrus, in common with many others, was rescued from the worthy
calvinists, and has since held a quiet corner to himself in the temple of
fame.

a poet whose misfortunes were of service to his talent, was pomponius
secundus. his friendship with aelius gallus, son to sejanus, caused him to
be imprisoned during several years. while in this condition he devoted
himself to literature, and wrote many tragedies which are spoken well of
by quintilian: "eorum (tragic poets) quos viderim longe princeps pomponius
secundus." [19] he was an acute rhetorician, and a purist in language. the
extant names of his plays are _aeneas_, and perhaps _armorum judicium_ and
_atreus_, but these last two are uncertain. tragedy was much cultivated
during the imperial times; for it formed an outlet for feeling not
otherwise safe to express, and it admitted all the ornaments of rhetoric.
those who regard the tragedies of seneca as the work of the father, would
refer them to this reign, to the end of which the old man's activity
lasted, though his energies were more taken up with watching and guiding
the careers of his children than with original composition. when tiberius
died (37 a.d.) literature could hardly have been at a lower ebb; but even
then there were young men forming their minds and imbibing new canons of
taste, who were destined before long--for almost all wrote early--to
redeem the age from the charge of dulness, perhaps at too great a
sacrifice.




chapter ii.

the reigns of caligula, claudius, and nero (37-68 a.d.).


1. poets.

we have grouped these three emperors under a single heading because the
shortness of the reigns of the two former prevented the formation of any
special school of literature. it is otherwise with the reign of nero. to
this belongs a constellation of some of the most brilliant authors that
rome ever produced. and they are characterised by some very special
traits. instead of the depression we noticed under tiberius we now observe
a forced vivacity and sprightliness, even in dealing with the most awful
or serious subjects, which is unlike anything we have hitherto met with in
roman literature. it is quite different from the natural gaiety of
catullus; equally so from the witty frivolity of ovid. it is not in the
least meant to be frivolous; on the contrary it arises from an
overstrained earnestness, and a desire to say everything in the most
pointed and emphatic form in which it can be said. to whatever school the
writers belong, this characteristic is always present. persius shows it as
much as seneca; the historians as much as the rhetors. the only one who is
not imbued with it is the professed wit petronius. probably he had
exhausted it in conversation; perhaps he disapproved of it as a corrupt
importation of the senecas.

the emperors themselves were all _literati_. caligula, it is true, did not
publish, but he gave great attention to eloquence, and was even more
vigorous as an extempore speaker than as a writer. his mental derangement
affected his criticism. he thought at one time of burning all the copies
of homer that could be got at; at another of removing all the statues of
livy and virgil, the one as unlearned and uncritical, the other as verbose
and negligent. one is puzzled to know to which respectively these
criticisms refer. we do not venture to assign them, but translate
literally from suetonius. [1]

claudius had a brain as sluggish as caligula's was over-excitable;
nevertheless he prosecuted literature with care, and published several
works. among these was a history, beginning with the death of julius
caesar, in forty-three volumes, [2] an autobiography in eight, [3] "magis
inepte quam ineleganter scriptum;" a learned defence of cicero against
asinius gallus's invective, besides several greek writings. his
philological studies and the innovations he tried to introduce have been
referred to in a former chapter. [4]

nero, while a young man before his accession, tried his powers in nearly
every department of letters. he approached philosophy, but his prudent
mother deterred him from a study which might lead him to views "above his
station as a prince." he next turned to the old orators, but here his
preceptor seneca intervened, tacitus insinuates, with the motive of
turning him from the best models to an admiration of his own more
seductive style. nero declaimed frequently in public, and his poetical
effusions seem to have possessed some real merit. at the first celebration
of the festival called _neroniana_ he was crowned with the wreath of
victory. his most celebrated poem, the one that drew down on him the irony
of juvenal, was the _troica_, in which perhaps occurred the _troiae
halosis_ which this madman recited in state over the burning ruins of
rome, and which is parodied with subtle mockery in petronius. other poems
were of a lighter cast and intended to be sung to the accompaniment of the
harp. these were the crowning scandal of his imperial vagaries in the eyes
of patriotic romans. "with our prince a fiddler," cries juvenal, "what
further disgrace remains?" king lewis of bavaria and some other great
personages of our era would perhaps object to juvenal's conclusion. with
all these accomplishments, however, nero either could not or would not
speak. he had not the vigour of mind necessary for eloquence. hence he
usually employed seneca to dress up speeches for him, a task which that
polite minister was not sorry to undertake.

the earliest poet who comes before us is the unknown author of the
panegyric on calpurnius piso. it is an elegant piece of versification with
no particular merit or demerit. it takes pains to justify piso for flute-
playing in public, and as nero's example is not alleged, the inference is
natural that it was written before his time. there is no independence of
style, merely a graceful reflection from that of the augustan poets.

we must now examine the circumstances which surrounded or produced the
splendid literature of nero's reign. such persons as from political
hostility to the government, or from disgust at the flagitious conduct by
which alone success was to be purchased, lived apart in a select circle,
stern and defiant, unsullied by the degradation round them, though
helpless to influence it for good. they consisted for the most part of
virtuous noblemen such as paetus thrasea, barea, rubellius plautus, above
all, helvidius priscus, on whose uncompromising independence tacitus loves
to dwell; and of philosophers, moral teachers and literati, who sought
after real excellence, not contemporary applause. the members of this
society lived in intimate companionship, and many ladies contributed their
share to its culture and virtuous aspirations. such were arria, the heroic
wife of paetus, fannia, the wife of helvidius, and fulvia sisenna, the
mother of persius. these held _reunions_ for literary or philosophical
discussions which were no mere conversational displays, but a serious
preparation for the terrible issues which at any time they might be called
upon to meet. it had long been the custom for wealthy romans of liberal
tastes to maintain a philosopher as part of their establishment. laelius
had shown hospitality both to panaetius and polybius; cicero had offered a
home to diodotus for more than twenty years, and catulus and lucullus had
both recognised the temporal needs of philosophy. under the empire the
practice was still continued, and though liable to the abuse of
charlatanism or pedantry, was certainly instrumental in familiarising
patrician families (and especially their lady members) with the great
thoughts and pure morality of the best thinkers of greece. from scattered
notices in seneca and quintilian, we should infer that the philosopher was
employed as a repository of spiritual confidences--almost a father-
confessor--at least as much as an intellectual teacher. when kanus julius
was condemned to death, his philosopher went with him to the scaffold and
uttered consoling words about the destiny of the soul; [5] and seneca's
own correspondence shows that he regarded this relation as the noblest
philosophy could hold. of such moral directors the most influential was
annaeus cornutus, both from his varied learning and his consistent
rectitude of life. like all the higher spirits he was a stoic, but a
genial and wise one. he neither affected austerity nor encouraged rash
attacks on power. his advice to his noble friends generally inclined
towards the side of prudence. nevertheless he could not so far control his
own language as to avoid the jealousy of nero. [6] he was banished, it is
not certain in what year, and apparently ended his days in exile. he left
several works, mostly written in greek; some on philosophy, of which that
on the nature of the gods has come down to us in an abridged form, some on
rhetoric and grammar; besides these he is said to have composed satires,
tragedies, [7] and a commentary on virgil. but his most important work was
his formation of the character of one of the three roman satirists whose
works have come down to us.

few poets have been so differently treated by different critics as a.
persius flaccus, for while some have pronounced him to be an excellent
satirist and true poet, others have declared that his fame is solely owing
to the trouble he gives us to read him. he was born at volaterrae, 34
a.d., of noble parentage, brought to rome as a child, and educated with
the greatest care. his first preceptor was the grammarian virginius
flavus, an eloquent man endued with strength of character, whose earnest
moral lectures drew down the displeasure of caligula. he next seems to
have attended a course under remmius palaemon; but as soon as he put on
the manly gown he attached himself to cornutus, whose intimate friend he
became, and of whose ideas he was the faithful exponent. the love of the
pupil for his guide in philosophy is beautiful and touching; the verses in
which it is expressed are the best in persius: [8]

  "secreti loquimur: tibi nunc hortante camena
  excutienda damus praecordia: quantaque nostrae
  pars tua sit cornute animae, tibi, dulcis amice,
  ostendisse iuvat ... teneros tu suscipis annos
  socratico cornute sino. tune fallere sollers
  apposita intortos extendit regula mores,
  et premitur ratione animus vincique laborat,
  artificemque tuo ducit sub pollice vultum."

moulded by the counsels of this good "doctor," persius adopted philosophy
with enthusiasm. in an age of licentiousness he preserved a maiden purity.
though possessing in a pre-eminent degree that gift of beauty which
juvenal declares to be fatal to innocence, persius retained until his
death a moral character without a stain. but he had a nobler example even
than cornutus by his side. he was tenderly loved by the great thrasea, [9]
whose righteous life and glorious death form perhaps the richest lesson
that the whole imperial history affords. thrasea was a cato in justice,
but more than a cato in goodness, inasmuch as his lot was harder, and his
spirit gentler and more human. men like these clenched the theories of
philosophy by that rare consistency which puts them into practice; and
persius, with all his literary faults, is the sole instance among roman
writers of a philosopher whose life was in accordance with the doctrines
he professed.

yet on opening his short book of satires, one is strongly tempted to ask,
what made the boy write them? he neither knew nor cared to know anything
of the world, and, we fear, cannot he credited with a philanthropic desire
to reform it. the answer is given partly by himself, that he was full of
petulant spleen, [10]--an honest confession,--partly is to be found in the
custom then becoming general for those who wished to live well to write
essays on serious subjects for private circulation among their friends,
pointing out the dangers that lay around, and encouraging them to
persevere in the right path. of this kind are several of seneca's
treatises, and we have notices of many others in the biographers and
historians. and though persius may have intended to publish his book to
the world, as is rendered probable by the prologue, this is not absolutely
certain. at any rate it did not appear until after his death, when his
friend caesius bassus [11] undertook to bring it out; so that we may
fairly regard it as a collection of youthful reflections as to the
advisability of publishing which the poet had not yet made up his mind,
and perhaps had he lived would have suppressed.

crabbed and loaded with obscure allusions as they are to a degree which
makes most of them extremely unpleasant reading, they obtained a
considerable and immediate reputation. lucan is reported to have declared
that his own works were bagatelles in comparison. [12] quintilian says
that he has gained much true glory in his single book; [13] martial, that
he is oftener quoted than domitius marsus in all his long _amazonis_. [14]
he is affirmed by his biographer to have written seldom and with
difficulty. all his earlier attempts were, by the advice of cornutus,
destroyed. they consisted of a _praetexta_, named _vescia_, of one book of
travels, and a few lines to the elder arria. among his predecessors his
chief admiration was reserved for horace, whom he imitates with
exaggerated fidelity, recalling, but generally distorting, nearly a
hundred well-known lines. the six poems we possess are not all, strictly
speaking, satires. the first, with the prologue, may be so considered. it
is devoted to an attack upon the literary style of the day. persius sees
that the decay of taste is intimately joined with the decay of morals, and
the subtle connections he draws between the two constitute the chief merit
of the effusion. like horace, but with even better reason, he bewails the
antiquarian predilections of the majority of readers. accius and pacuvius
still hold their ground, while virgil and horace are considered rough and
lacking delicacy! [15] if this last be a true statement, it testifies to
the depraved criticism of a luxurious age which alternates between
meretricious softness and uncouth disproportion, just as in life the idle
and effeminate, who shrink from manly labour, take pleasure in wild
adventure and useless fatigue. in this satire, which is the most condensed
of all, the literary defects of the author are at their height. his moral
taste is not irreproachable; in his desire not to mince matters he offends
needlessly against propriety. [16] the picture he draws of the fashionable
rhetorician with languishing eyes and throat mellowed by a luscious
gargle, warbling his drivelling ditties to an excited audience, is
powerful and lifelike. from assemblies like these he did well to keep
himself. we can imagine the effect upon their used-up emotions of a fresh
and fiery spirit like that of lucan, whose splendid presence and rich
enthusiasm threw to the winds these tricks of the reciter's art.

the second, third, and fourth poems are declamatory exercises on the
dogmas of stoicism, interspersed with dramatic scenes. the second has for
its subject the proper use of prayer. the majority, says persius, utter
_buying_ petitions (_prece emaci_), and by no means as a rule innocent
ones. few dare to acknowledge their prayers (_aperto vivere voto_). after
sixty lines of indignant remonstrance, he closes with a noble apostrophe,
in which some of the thoughts rise almost to a christian height--"o souls
bent to earth, empty of divine things! what boots it to import these
morals of ours into the temples, and to imagine what is good in god's
sight from the analogies of this sinful flesh?... why do we not offer him
something which messala's blear-eyed progeny with all his wealth cannot
offer, a spirit at one with justice and right, holy in its inmost depths,
and a heart steeped in nobleness and virtue? let me but bring these to the
altar, and a sacrifice of meal will be accepted!" in the third and fourth
satires he complains of the universal ignorance of our true interests, the
ridicule which the world heaps on philosophy, and the hap-hazard way in
which men prepare for hazardous duties. the contemptuous disgust of the
brawny centurion at the (to him) unmeaning problems which philosophy
starts, is vigorously delineated; [17] but some of his _tableaux_ border
on the ridiculous from their stilted concision and over-drawn sharpness of
outline. the undeniable virtue of the poet irritates as much as it
attracts, from its pert precocity and obtrusiveness. what he means for
pathos mostly chills instead of warming: "ut nemo in se curat descendere,
nemo!" [18] the poet who penned this line must surely have been tiresome
company. persius is at his best when he forgets for a moment the icy peak
to which as a philosopher he has climbed, and suns himself in the valley
of natural human affections--a reason why the fifth and sixth satires,
which are more personal than the rest, have always been considered greatly
superior to them. the last in particular runs for more than half its
length in a smooth and tolerably graceful stream of verse, which shows
that persius had much of the poetic gift, had his warped taste allowed him
to give it play.

we conclude with one or two instances of his language to justify our
strictures upon it. horace had used the expression _naso suspendis
adunco_, a legitimate and intelligible metaphor; persius imitates it,
_excusso populum suspendere naso_, [19] thereby rendering it frigid and
weak. horace had said _clament periisse pudorem cuncti paene patres_; [20]
persius caricatures him, _exclamet_ melicerta _perisse_ frontem _de
rebus_. [21] horace had said _si vis me flere, dolendum est primum ipsi
tibi_; [22] persius distorts this into _plorabit qui me volet_ incurvasse
_querela_. [23] other expressions more remotely modelled on him are
_iratum eupoliden praegrandi cum sene palles_, [24] and perhaps the very
harsh use of the accusative, _linguae quantum sitiat canis_, [25] "as long
a tongue as a thirsty dog hangs out."

common sense is not to be looked for in the precepts of so immature a
mind. accordingly, we find the foolish maxim that a man not endowed with
reason (_i.e._ stoicism) cannot do anything aright: [26] that every one
should live up to his yearly income regardless of the risk arising from a
bad season; [27] extravagant paradoxes reminding us of some of the less
educated religious sects of the present day; with this difference, that in
rome it was the most educated who indulged in them. a good deal of the
obscurity of these satires was forced upon the poet by the necessity of
avoiding everything that could be twisted into treason. we read in
suetonius that nero is attacked in them; but so well is the battery masked
that it is impossible to find it. some have detected it in the prologue,
others in the opening lines of the first satire, others, relying on a
story that cornutus made him alter the line--

  "auriculas asini mida rex habet,"

to _quis non habet_? have supposed that the satire lies there. but satire
so veiled is worthless. the poems of persius are valuable chiefly as
showing a good _naturel_ amid corrupt surroundings, and forming a striking
comment on the change which had come over latin letters.

another stoic philosopher, probably known to persius, was c. musonius
rufus, like him an etruscan by birth, and a successful teacher of the
young. like almost all independent thinkers he was exiled, but recalled by
titus in his old age. the influence of such men must have extended far
beyond their personal acquaintance; but they kept aloof from the court.
this probably explains the conspicuous absence of any allusion to seneca
in persius's writings. it is probable that his stern friends, thrasea and
soranus disapproved of a courtier like seneca professing stoicism, and
would show him no countenance. he was not yet great enough to compel their
notice, and at this time confined his influence to the circle of nero,
whose tutor he was, and to those young men, doubtless numerous enough,
whom his position and seductive eloquence attracted by a double charm. of
these by far the most illustrious was his nephew lucan.

m. annaeus lucanus, the son of annaeus mela and acilia, a spanish lady of
high birth, was born at corduba, 39 a.d. his grandfather, therefore, was
seneca the elder, whose rhetorical bent he inherited. legend tells of him,
as of hesiod, that in his infancy a swarm of bees settled upon the cradle
in which he lay, giving an omen of his future poetic glory. brought to
rome, and placed under the greatest masters, he soon surpassed all his
young competitors in powers of declamation. he is said, while a boy, to
have attracted large audiences, who listened with admiration to the
ingenious eloquence that expressed itself with equal ease in greek or
latin. his uncle soon introduced him to nero; and he at once recognised in
him a congenial spirit. they became friendly rivals. lucan had the address
to conceal his superior talent behind artful flattery, which nero for a
time believed sincere. but men, and especially young men of genius, cannot
be always prudent. and if lucan had not vaunted his success, rome at least
was sure to be less reticent. nero saw that public opinion preferred the
young spaniard to himself. the mutual ill-feeling that had already long
smouldered was kindled into flame by the result of a poetical contest, at
which lucan was declared victorious. [28] nero, who was present, could not
conceal his mortification. he left the hall in a rage, and forbade the
poet to recite in public, or even to plead in his profession. thus
debarred from the successes which had so long flattered his self-love,
lucan gave his mind to worthier subjects. he composed, or at least
finished, the _pharsalia_ in the following year (65 b.c.); but with the
haste and want of secrecy which characterised him, not only libelled the
emperor, but joined the conspiracy against him, of which piso was the
head. this gave nero the opportunity he desired. in vain the unhappy young
man abased himself to humble flattery, to piteous entreaty, even to the
incrimination of his own mother, a base proceeding which he hoped might
gain him the indulgence of a matricide prince. all was useless. nero was
determined that he should die, and he accordingly had his veins opened,
and expired amid applauding friends, while reciting those verses of his
epic which described the death of a brave centurion. [29]

the genius and sentiments of lucan were formed under two different
influences. among the adherents of caesarism, none were so devoted as
those provincials or freedmen who owed to it their wealth and position.
lucan, as seneca's nephew, naturally attached himself from the first to
the court party. he knew of the republic only as a name, and, like ovid,
had no reason to be dissatisfied with his own time. fame, wealth, honours,
all were open to him. we can imagine the feverish delight with which a
youth of three and twenty found himself recognised as prince of roman
poets. but lucan had a spirit of truthfulness in him that pined after
better things. at the lectures of cornutus, in the company of persius, he
caught a glimpse of this higher life. and so behind the showy splendours
of his rhetoric there lurks a sadness which tells of a mind not altogether
content, a brooding over man's life and its apparent uselessness, which
makes us believe that had he lived till middle life he would have struck a
lofty vein of noble and earnest song. at other times, at the banquet or in
the courts, he must have met young men who lived in an altogether
different world from his, a world not of intoxicating pleasures but of
gloomy indignation and sullen regret; to whom the empire, grounded on
usurpation and maintained by injustice, was the quintessence of all that
was odious; to whom nero was an upstart tyrant, and brutus and cassius the
watchwords of justice and right. sentiments like these could not but be
remembered by one so impressionable. as soon as the sunshine of favour was
withdrawn, lucan's ardent mind turned with enthusiasm towards them. the
_pharsalia_, and especially the closing books of it, show us lucan as the
poet of liberty, the mourner for the lost republic. the expression of
feeling may be exaggerated, and little consistent with the flattery with
which the poem opens; yet even this flattery, when carefully read, seems
fuller of satire than of praise: [30]

  "quod si non aliam venturo fata neroni
  invenere viam, magnoque aeterna parantur
  regna deis, caelumque suo servire tonanti
  non nisi saevorum potuit post bella gigantum;
  iam nihil o superi querimur! scelera ipsa nefasque
  hac mercede placent!"

the _pharsalia_, then, is the outcome of a prosperous rhetorical career on
the one hand, and of a bitter disappointment which finds its solace in
patriotic feeling on the other. it is difficult to see how such a poem
could have failed to ruin him, even if he had not been doomed before. the
loss of freedom is bewailed in words, which, if declamatory, are fatally
courageous, and reflect perilous honour on him that used them: [31]

      "fugiens civile nefas redituraque nunquam
  libertas ultra tigrim rhenumque [32] recessit,
  ac toties nobis iugulo quaesita, vagatur,
  germanum scythicumque bonum, nec respicit ultra
  ausoniam."

it is true that his love for freedom, like that of virgil, was based on an
idea, not a reality. but it none the less required a great soul to utter
these stirring sentiments before the very face of nero, the "vultus
instantis tyranni" of which horace had dreamed.

on the fitness or unfitness of his theme for epic treatment no more need
be added here than was said in the chapter on virgil. it is, however,
difficult to see what subject was open to the epicist after virgil except
to narrate the actual account of what virgil had painted in ideal colours.
the calm march of government under divine guidance from aeneas to augustus
was one side of the picture. the fierce struggles and remorseless ambition
of the civil wars is the other. which is the more true? it would be fairer
to ask, which is the more poetical? it was lucan's misfortune that the
ideal side was already occupied; he had no power to choose. few who have
read the _pharsalia_ would wish it unwritten. some critics have denied
that it is poetry at all. [33] poetry of the first order it certainly is
not, but those who will forgive artistic defects for energy of thought and
strength of feeling must always retain a strong admiration for its noble
imperfections.

we shall offer a few critical remarks on the _pharsalia_, referring our
readers for an exhaustive catalogue of its defects to m. nisard's second
volume of the _poetes de la decadence_, and confining ourselves
principally to such points as he has not dwelt upon. in the first place we
observe a most unfortunate attitude towards the greatest problem that can
exercise man's mind, his relation to the superior power. lucan has neither
the reverence of virgil, the antagonism of lucretius, nor the awful doubt
of greek tragedy. his attitude is one of pretentious rebellion and
flippant accusation, except when stoic doctrines raise him for a time
above himself. he goes on every occasion quite out of his way to assail
the popular ideas of providence. to lucretius this is a necessity entailed
upon him by his subject; to lucan it is nothing but petulant rhetorical
outburst. for instance, he calls ptolemy _fortunae pudor crimenque
deorum_; [34] he arraigns the gods as caring more for vengeance than
liberty; [35] he calls septimius a disgrace to the gods, [36] the death of
pompey a tale at which heaven ought to blush; [37] he speaks of the
expression on pompey's venerable face as one of anger against the gods,
[38] of the stone that marks his tomb as an indictment against heaven,
[39] and hopes that it may soon be considered as false a witness of his
death as crete is to that of jove; [40] he makes young pompey, speaking of
his father's death, say: "whatever insult of fate has scattered his limbs
to the winds, i forgive the gods that wrong, it is of what they have left
that i complain;" [41] saddest of all, he gives us that tremendous
epigram: [42]

  "victrix causa deis placuit, sed victa catoni."

we recognise here a noble but misguided spirit, fretting at the
dispensations it cannot approve, because it cannot understand them.
bitterly disgusted at the failure of the empire to fulfil all its promise,
the writers of this period waste their strength in unavailing upbraidings
of the gods. there is a retrograde movement of thought since the augustan
age. virgil and horace take substantially the same view of the empire as
that which the philosophy of history has taught us is the true one; they
call it a necessity, and express that belief by deifying its
representative. contrast the spirit of horace in the third ode of the
third book:

  "hac arte pollux hac vagus hercules
  enisus arces attigit igneas;
  quos inter augustus recumbens
  purpureo bibit ore nectar,"

with the fierce irony of lucan: [43]

                      "mortalis nulli
  sunt curata deo; cladis tamen huius habemus
  _vindictam_, quantam terris dare numina fas est.
  bella pares superis faciunt civilia divos;
  fulminibus manes radiisque ornabit et astris,
  inque deum templis iurabit roma per _umbras_."

here is the satire of cicero's second philippic reappearing, but with
added bitterness. [44] being thus without belief in a divine providence,
how does lucan govern the world? by blind fate, or blinder caprice!
_fortuna_, whom juvenal ridicules, [45] is the true deity of lucan. as
such she is directly mentioned ninety-one times, besides countless others
where her agency is implied. a useful belief for a man like caesar who
fought his way to empire; a most unfortunate conception for an epic poet
to build a great poem on.

lucan's scepticism has this further disadvantage that it precludes him
from the use of the supernatural. to introduce the council of olympus as
virgil does would in him be sheer mockery, and he is far too honest to
attempt it. but as no great poet can dispense with some reference to the
unseen, lucan is driven to its lower and less poetic spheres. ghosts,
witches, dreams, visions, and portents, fill with their grisly catalogue a
disproportionate space of the poem. the sibyl is introduced as in virgil,
but instead of giving her oracle with solemn dignity, she first refuses to
speak at all, then under threats of cruel punishment she submits to the
influence of the god, but in the midst of the prophetic impulse, apollo,
for some unexplained reason, compels her to stop short and conceal the
gist of her message. [46] even more unpleasant is the description of
sextus pompeius's consultation of the witch erichtho; [47] horror upon
horror is piled up until the blood curdles at the sickening details, which
even southey's _thalaba_ does not approach--and, after all, the feeling
produced is not horror but disgust.

it is pleasant to turn from his irreligion to his philosophy. here he
appears as an uncertain but yet ardent disciple of the porch. his
uncertainty is shown by his inability to answer many grave doubts, as: why
is the future revealed by presages? [48] why are the oracles, once so
vocal, now silent? [49] his enthusiasm by his portraiture of cato, who was
regarded by the stoics as coming nearest of all men to their ideal wise
man. cato is to him a peg on which to hang the virtues and paradoxes of
the school. but none the less is the sketch he gives a truly noble one:
[50]

  "hi mores, haec duri immota catonis
  secta fuit, servare modum finemque tenere,
  naturamque sequi, patriaeque impendere vitam,
  nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo."

nothing in all latin poetry reaches a higher pitch of ethical sublimity
than cato's reply to labienus when entreated to consult the oracle of
jupiter ammon: [51] "what would you have me ask? whether i ought to die
rather than become a slave? whether life begins here or after death?
whether evil can hurt the good man? whether it be enough to will what is
good? whether virtue is made greater by success? all this i know already,
and hammon's voice will not make it more sure. we all depend on heaven,
and though oracles be silent we cannot act without the will of god. deity
needs no witness: once for all at our birth he has given us all needful
knowledge, nor has he chosen barren sands accessible to few, or buried
truth in a desert. where earth, sea, sky, and virtue exist, there is god.
why seek we heaven outside?" these, and similar other sentiments scattered
throughout the poem, redeem it from the charge of wanton disbelief, and
show a largeness of soul that only needed experience to make it truly
great.

in discussing political and social questions lucan shows considerable
insight. he could not, any more than his contemporaries, understand that
the old oligarchy was an anachronism; that the stubborn pride of its
votaries needed the sword to break it. but the influence of individual
genius is well pourtrayed by him, and he seizes character with a vigorous
grasp. as a partisan of the senate, he felt bound to exalt pompey; but if
we judge by his own actions and his own words, not by the encomiums heaped
on him by the poet, lucan's pompey comes very near the genuine historical
man. so the caesar sketched by lucan, though meant to be a villain of the
blackest dye--if we except some blood-thirsty speeches--stands out as a
true giant of energy, neither meaner nor more unscrupulous than the caesar
of history. domitius, curio, and lentulus, are vigorous though somewhat
defective portraits. cornelia is the only female character that calls for
notice. she is drawn with breadth and sympathy, and bears all the traits
of a great roman matron. the degradation of the people is a constant theme
of lamentation. it is wealth, luxury, and the effeminacy that comes with
them that have softened the fibre of rome, and made her willing to bear a
master. this is indeed a common-place of the schools, but it is none the
less a gloomy truth, and lucan would have been no roman had he omitted to
complain of it. equally characteristic is his contempt for the lower
orders [52] and the influx of foreigners, of whom rome had become the
common sink. juvenal, who evidently studied lucan, drew from him the
picture of the tiber soiled by orontes's foul stream, and of the
bithynian, galatian, and cappadocian knights. [53]

with regard to the artistic side of the poem the first and most obvious
criticism is that it has no hero. but if this be a fault, it is one which
it shares with the _divina commedia_ and _paradise lost_. as satan has
been called the hero of the latter poem, so caesar, if not the hero, is
the protagonist of the _pharsalia_. but cato, pompey, and the senate as a
body, have all competed for this honour. the fact is this: that while the
primitive epic is altogether personal, the poem whose interest is national
or human cannot always find a single hero. it is after all a narrow
criticism that confines the poet's art within such strict limits. a great
poet can hardly avoid changing or at least modifying the existing canons
of art, and lucan should at least be judged with the same liberality as
the old annalists who celebrated the wars of the republic.

in description lucan is excellent, both in action and still life, but more
in brilliancy of detail than in broad effects. his defect lies in the tone
of exaggeration which he has acquired in the schools, and thinks it right
to employ in order not to fall below his subject. he has a true opinion of
the importance of the civil war, which he judges to be the final crisis of
rome's history, and its issues fraught with superhuman grandeur. the
innate materialism of his mind, however, leads him to attach _outward_
magnitude to all that is connected with it. thus nero, the offspring of
its throes, is entreated by the poet to be careful, when he leaves earth
to take his place among the immortals, not to seat himself in a quarter
where his weight may disturb the just equilibrium of the globe! [54] and,
similarly, all the incidents of the civil war exceed the parallel
incidents of every other war in terror and vastness. do portents presage a
combat? they are such as defy all power to conceive. pindus mounts upon
olympus, [55] and others of a more ordinary but still amazing character
follow. [56] does a naval conflict take place? the horrors of all the
elements combine to make it the most hideous that the mind can imagine.
fire and water vie with each other in devising new modes of death, and
where these are inactive, it is only because a land-battle with all its
carnage is being enacted on the closely-wedged ships. [57] has the army to
march across a desert? the entire race of venomous serpents conspires to
torture and if possible extirpate the host! [58] this is a very inartistic
mode of heightening effect, and, indeed, borders closely on that pursued
in the modern _sensation_ novel. it is beyond question the worst defect of
the _pharsalia_, and the extraordinary ingenuity with which it is done
only intensifies the misconduct of the poet.

over and above this habitual exaggeration, lucan has a decided love for
the ghastly and revolting. the instances to which allusion has already
been made, viz. the thessalian sorceress and the dreadful casualties of
the sea-fight, show it very strikingly, but the account of the serpents in
the libyan desert, if possible, still more. the episode is of great
length, over three hundred lines, and contains much mythological
knowledge, as well as an appalling power of description. it begins with a
discussion of the question, why is africa so full of these plagues? after
giving various hypotheses he adopts the one which assigns their origin to
medusa's hairs which fell from perseus's hand as he sailed through the
air. in order not to lure people to certain death by appearing in an
inhabited country, he chose the trackless wastes of africa over which to
wing his flight. the mythological disquisition ended, one on natural
history follows. the peculiar properties of the venom of each species are
minutely catalogued, first in abstract terms, then in the concrete by a
description of their effects on some of cato's soldiers. the first bitten
was the standard-bearer aulus, by a dipsas, which afflicted him with
intolerable thirst; next sabellus by a seps, a minute creature whose bite
was followed by an instantaneous corruption of the whole body; [59] then
nasidius by a prester which caused his form to swell to an unrecognisable
size, and so on through the list of serpents, each episode closing with a
brilliant epigram which clenches the effect. [60] trivialities like these
would spoil the greatest poem ever penned. it need not be said that they
spoil the _pharsalia_.

another subject on which lucan rings the changes is death. the word _mors_
has an unwholesome attraction to his ear. death is to him the greatest
gift of heaven; the only one it cannot take away. it is sad indeed to hear
the young poet uttering sentiments like this: [61]

  "scire mori sors prima viris, sed proxima cogi,"

and again [62]--

  "victurosque dei celant, ut vivere durent,
  felix esse mori."

so in cursing crastinus, caesar's fierce centurion, he wishes him not to
die, but to retain sensibility after death, in other words to be immortal.
the sentiment occurs, not once but a hundred times, that of all pleasures
death is the greatest. he even plays upon the word, using it in senses
which it will hardly bear. _libycae mortes_ are serpents; _accessit morti
libye_, "libya added to the mortality of the army;" _nulla cruentae tantum
mortis habet_; "no other reptile causes a death so bloody." to one so
unhealthily familiar with the idea, the reality, when it came, seems to
have brought unusual terrors.

the learning of lucan has been much extolled, and in some respects not
without reason. it is complex, varied, and allusive, but its extreme
obscurity makes us suspect even when we cannot prove, inaccuracy. he is
proud of his manifold acquirements. nothing pleases him more than to have
an excuse for showing his information on some abstruse subject. the causes
of the climate of africa, the meteorological conditions of spain, the
theory of the globes, the geography of the southern part of our
hemisphere, the wonders of egypt and the views about the source of the
nile, are descanted on with diffuse erudition. but it is evidently
impossible that so mere a youth could have had a deep knowledge of so many
subjects, especially as his literary productiveness had already been very
great. he had written an _iliacon_ according to statius, [63] a book of
_saturnalia_, ten books of _silvae_, a _catachthonion_, an unfinished
tragedy called _medea_, fourteen _salticae fabulae_ (no doubt out of
compliment to nero), a prose essay against octavius sagitta, another in
favour of him, a poem _de incendio urbis_, in which nero was satirised, a
_katakausmos_ (which is perhaps different from the latter, but may be only
the same under another title), a series of letters from campania, and an
address to his wife, polla argentaria.

a peculiar, and to us offensive, exhibition of learning consists in those
tirades on common-place themes, embodying all the stock current of
instances, of which the earliest example is found in the catalogue of the
dead in virgil's _culex_. lucan, as may be supposed, delights in dressing
up these well-worn themes, painting them with novel splendour if they are
descriptive, thundering in fiery epigrams, if they are moral. of the
former class are two of the most effective scenes in the poem. the first
is caesar's night voyage in a skiff over a stormy sea. the fisherman to
whom he applies is unwilling to set sail. the night, he says, shows many
threatening signs, and, by way of deterring caesar, he enumerates the
entire list of prognostics to be found in aratus, hesiod, and virgil, with
great piquancy of touch, but without the least reference to the propriety
of the situation. [64] nothing can be more amusing, or more out of place,
than the old man's sudden erudition. the second is the death of scaeva,
who for a time defended caesar's camp single-handed. the poet first
remarks that valour in a bad cause is a crime, and then depicts that of
scaeva in such colossal proportions as almost pass the limits of
burlesque. after describing him as pierced with so many spears that they
served him _as armour_, he adds: [65]

  "nec quicquam nudis vitalibus obstat
  iam, praeter stantes in _summis ossibus_ hastas."

this is grotesque enough; the banquet of birds and beasts who feed on the
skin of pharsalia is even worse. [66] the details are too loathsome to
quote. suffice it to say that the list includes every carrion-feeder among
flesh and fowl who assemble in immense flocks:

  "nunquam tanto se vulture caelum
  _induit_, aut plures _presserunt_ aethere pennae."

we have, however, dwelt too long on points like these. we must now notice
a few features of his style which mark him as the representative of an
epoch. first, his extreme cleverness. in splendid extravagance of
expression no latin author comes near him. the miniature painting of
statius, the point of martial, are both feeble in comparison; for lucan's
language, though often tasteless, is always strong. some of his lines
embody a condensed trenchant vigour which has made them proverbs. phrases
like _trahimur sub nomine pacis--momentumque fuit mutatus curio rerum_,
recall the pen of tacitus. others are finer still caesar's energy is
rivalled by the line--

  "nil actum credens dum quid superesset agendum."

the duty of securing liberty, even at the cost of blood, was never more
finely expressed than by the noble words:

  "ignoratque datos ne quisquam serviat enses."

curio's treachery is pilloried in the epigram,

  "emere omnes, hic vendidit urbem." [67]

the mingled cowardice and folly of servile obedience is nobly expressed by
his reproach to the people:

  "usque adeone times, quem tu facis ipse timendum?" [68]

an author who could write like this had studied rhetoric to some purpose.
unhappily he is oftener diffuse than brief, and sometimes he becomes
tedious to the last degree. his poetical art is totally deficient in
variety. he knows of but one method of gaining effect, the use of strong
language and plenty of it. if persius was inflated with the vain desire to
surpass horace, lucan seems to have been equally ambitious of excelling
virgil. he rarely imitates, but he frequently competes with him. over and
over again, he approaches the same or similar subjects. virgil had
described the victory of hercules over cacus, lucan must celebrate his
conflict with antaeus; virgil had mentioned the portents that followed
caesar's death, lucan must repeat them with added improbabilities in a
fresh context; his sibyl is but a tasteless counterpart of virgil's; his
catalogues of forces have virgil's constantly in view; his deification of
nero is an exaggeration of that of augustus, and even the celebrated
simile in which virgil admits his obligations to the greek stage has its
parallel in the _pharsalia_. [69]

nevertheless lucan is of all latin poets the most independent in relation
to his predecessors. it needs a careful criticism to detect his knowledge
and imitation of virgil. as far as other poets go he might never have read
their works. the impetuous course of the _pharsalia_ is interrupted by no
literary reminiscences, no elaborate setting of antique gems. he was a
stranger to that fond pleasure with which virgil entwined his poetry round
the spreading branches of the past, and wove himself a wreath out of
flowers new and old. this lack of delicate feeling is no less evident in
his rhythm. instead of the inextricable harmonies of virgil's cadence, we
have a succession of rich, forcible, and polished monotonous lines,
rushing on without a thought of change until the period closes. in formal
skill lucan was a proficient, but his ear was dull. the same caesuras
recur again and again, [70] and the only merit of his rhythm is its
undeniable originality. [71] the composition of the _pharsalia_ must,
however, have been extremely hurried, judging both from the fact that
three books only were finished the year before the poet's death, and from
various indications of haste in the work itself. the tenth book is
obviously unfinished, and in style is far more careless than the rest.
lucan's diction is tolerably classical, but he is lax in the employment of
certain words, _e.g. mors, fatum, pati_ (in the sense of _vivere_), and
affects forced combinations from the desire to be terse, _e.g., degener
toga_, [72] _stimulis negare_, [73] _nutare regna_, "to portend the advent
of despotism;" [74] _meditari leucada_, "to intend to bring about the
catastrophe of actium," [75] and so on. we observe also several
innovations in syntax, especially the freer use of the infinitive (_vivere
durent_) after verbs, or as a substantive, a defect he shares with persius
(_scire tuum_); and the employment of the future participle to state a
possibility or a condition that might have been fulfilled, _e.g., unumque
caput tam magna iuventus privatum_ factura _timet velut ensibus ipse
imperet invito_ moturus _milite bellum_. [76] a strong depreciation of
lucan's genius has been for some time the rule of criticism. and in an age
when little time is allowed for reading any but the best authors, it is
perhaps undesirable that he should be rehabilitated. yet throughout the
middle ages and during more than one great epoch in french history, he was
ranked among the highest epic poets. even now there are many scholars who
greatly admire him. the false metaphor and exaggerated tone may be
condoned to a youth of twenty-six; the lofty pride and bold devotion to
liberty could not have been acquired by an ignoble spirit. he is of value
to science as a moderately accurate historian who supplements caesar's
narrative, and gives a faithful picture of the feeling general among the
nobility of his day. he is also a prominent representative of that gifted
spanish family who, in various ways, exercised so immense an influence on
subsequent roman letters. his wife is said to have assisted in the
composition of the poem, but in what part of it her talents fitted her to
succeed we cannot even conjecture.

to nero's reign are probably to be referred the seven eclogues of t.
calpurnius siculus, and the poem on aetna, long attributed to virgil.
these may bear comparison in respect of their want of originality with the
_satires_ of persius, though both fall far short of them in talent and
interest. the mss. of calpurnius contain, besides the seven genuine poems,
four others by a later and much inferior writer, probably nemesianus, the
same who wrote a poem on the chase in the reign of numerian. these are
imitated from calpurnius much as he imitates virgil, except that the
decline in metrical treatment is greater. the first eclogue of calpurnius
is devoted to the praises of a young emperor who is to regenerate the
world, and exercise a wisdom, a clemency, and a patronage of the arts long
unknown. he is celebrated again in eclogue iv., the most pretentious of
the series, and, in general, critics are agreed that nero is intended. the
second poem is the most successful of all, and a short account of it may
be given here. astacus and idas, two beauteous youths, enter into a
poetical contest at which thyrsis acts as judge. faunus, the satyrs, and
nymphs, "sicco dryades pede naides udo," are present. the rivers stay
their course; the winds are hushed; the oxen forget their pasture; the bee
steadies itself on poised wing to listen. an amoebean contest ensues, in
which the rivals closely imitate those of virgil's seventh eclogue,
singing against one another in stanzas of four lines. thyrsis declines to
pronounce either conqueror:

  "este pares: et ab hoc concordes vivite: nam vos
  et decor et cantus et amor sociavit et aetas."

the rhythm is pleasing; the style simple and flowing; and if we did not
possess the model we might admire the copy. the tone of exaggeration which
characterises all the poetry of nero's time mars the reality of these
pastoral scenes. the author professes great reverence for virgil, but does
not despair of being coupled with him (vi. 64):

  "magna petis corydon, si tityrus esse laboras."

and he begs his wealthy friend meliboeus (perhaps seneca) to introduce his
poems to the emperor (ecl. iv. 157), and so fulfil for him the office that
he who led tityrus to rome did for the mantuan bard. if his vanity is
somewhat excessive we must allow him the merits of a correct and pretty
versifier.

the didactic poem on aetna is now generally attributed to lucilius junior,
the friend and correspondent of seneca. scaliger printed it with virgil's
works, and others have assigned cornelius severus as the author, but
several considerations tend to fix our choice on lucilius. first, the poem
is beyond doubt much later than the augustan age; the constant
reproduction, often unconscious, of virgil's form of expression, implies
an interval of at least a generation; allusions to manilius [77] may be
detected, and perhaps to petronius arbiter, [78] but at the same time it
seems to have been written before the great eruption of vesuvius (69
a.d.), in which pliny lost his life, since no mention is made of that
event. all these conditions are fulfilled by lucilius. moreover, he is
described by seneca as a man who by severe and conscientious study had
raised his position in life (which is quite what we should imagine from
reading the poem), and whose literary attainments were greatly due to
seneca's advice and care. "assero te mihi: meum opus es," he says in one
of his epistles, [79] and in another he asks him for the long promised
account of a voyage round sicily which lucilius had made. he goes on to
say, "i hope you will describe aetna, the theme of so many poets' song.
ovid was not deterred from attempting it though virgil had occupied the
ground, nor did the success of both of these deter cornel. severus. if i
know you aetna excites in you the desire to write; you wish to try some
great work which shall equal the fame of your predecessors." [80] as the
poem further shows some resemblances to an essay on aetna, published by
seneca himself, the conclusion is almost irresistible that lucilius is its
author.

though by no means equal to the reputation it once had, the poem is not
without merit. the diction is much less stilted than seneca's or
persius's; the thoughts mostly correct, though rather tame; and the
descriptions accurate even to tediousness. the arrangement of his subject
betrays a somewhat weak hand, though in this he is superior to gratius
faliscus; but he has an earnest desire to make truth known, and a warm
interest in his theme. the opening invocation is addressed to apollo and
the muses, asking their aid along an unwonted road.

he denies that eruptions are the work of gods or cyclopes, and laments
over the errors that the genius of poetry has spread (74-92)--

  "plurima pars scaenae fallacia."

the scenes that poets paint are rarely true, and often very hurtful, but
he is moved only with the desire to discover and communicate truth. he
then begins to discuss the power of confined air when striving to force a
passage, and the porous nature of the interior of the earth; and (after a
fine digression on the thirst for knowledge), he examines the properties
of fire, and specially its effect on the different minerals composing the
soil of aetna. a disproportionate amount (nearly 150 lines) is given to
describing lava, after which his theory is thus concisely summarised--

  "haec operis forma est: sic nobilis uritur aetna:
  terra foraminibus vires trahit, urget in artum,
  spiritus incendit: vivit per maxima saxa."

the poem concludes with an account of a former eruption, signalised by the
miraculous preservation of two pious youths who ventured into the burning
shower to carry their parents into a place of safety. the poem is
throughout a model of propriety, but deficient in poetic inspiration; the
technical parts, elaborate as they are, impress the reader less favourably
than the digressions, where subjects of human interest are treated, and
the roman character comes out. lucilius called himself an epicurean, and
is so far consistent as to condemn the "fallacia vatum" and the
superstition that will not recognise the sufficiency of physical causes;
but he (v. 537) accepts heraclitus's doctrine about the universality of
fire, and in other places shows stoic leanings. he imitates lucretius's
transitions, and his appeals to the reader, _e.g._ 160: _falleris et
nondum certo tibi lumine res est_, and inserts many archaisms as _ulli_
for _ullius_, _opus_ governing an accus., _cremant_ for _cremantur_,
_auras_ (gen. sing.) _iubar_ (masc.) _aureus_. [81] his rhythm resembles
virgil, but even more that of manilius.

we cannot conclude this chapter without some notice of the tragedies of
seneca. there can be no reasonable doubt that they are the work of the
philosopher, nor is the testimony of antiquity really ambiguous on the
point. [82] when he wrote them is uncertain; but they bear every mark of
being an early exercise of his pen. perhaps they were begun during his
exile in corsica, when enforced idleness must have tasked the resources of
his busy mind, and continued after his return to rome, when he found that
nero was addicted to the same pursuit. there are eight complete tragedies
and one praetexta, the _octavia_, which is generally supposed to be by a
later hand, as well as considerable fragments from the _thebais_ and
_phoenissae_. the subjects are all from the well-worn repository of greek
legend, and are mostly drawn from euripides. the titles of _medea_,
_hercules furens_, _hippolytus_ and _troades_ at once proclaim their
origin, but the _hercules oetaeus_, _oedipus thyestes_, and _agamemnon_,
are probably based on a comparison of the treatment by the several attic
masters. the tragedies of seneca have as a rule been strongly censured for
their rhetorical colouring, their false passion, and their total want of
dramatic interest. they are to the greek plays as gaslight to sunlight.
but in estimating their poetic value it is fair to remember that the roman
ideas of art were neither so accurate nor so profound as ours. the deep
analysis of aristotle, which grouped all poets who wrote on a _theme_
under the title _rhetorical_, and refused to empedocles the name of poet
at all, would not have been appreciated by the romans. to them the _form_
was what constituted a work poetical, not the creative idea that underlay
it. to utilise fictitious situations as a vehicle for individual
conviction or lofty declamation on ethical commonplace, was considered
quite legitimate even in the augustan age. and seneca did but follow the
example of varius and ovid in the tragedies now before us. it is to the
genius of german criticism, so wonderfully similar in many ways to that of
greece, that we owe the re-establishment of the profound ideal canons of
art over the artificial technical maxims which from horace to voltaire had
been accepted in their stead. the present low estimate of seneca is due to
the reaction (a most healthy one it is true) that has replaced the
extravagant admiration in which his poems were for more than two centuries
held.

the worst technical fault in these tragedies is their violation of the
decencies of the stage. manto, the daughter of tiresias and a great
prophetess, investigates the entrails in public. medea kills her children
_coram populo_ in defiance of horace's maxim. these are inexcusable
blemishes in a composition which is made according to a prescribed
_recipe_. his "tragic mixture," as it may be called, is compounded of
equal proportions of description, declamation, and philosophical
aphorisms. thus taken at intervals it formed an excellent tonic to assist
towards an oratorical training. it was not an end in itself, but was a
means for producing a finished rhetor. this is a degradation of the
loftiest kind of poetry known to art, no doubt; but seneca is not to blame
for having begun it. he merely used the material which lay before him;
nevertheless, he deserves censure for not having brought into it some of
the purer thoughts which philosophy had, or ought to have, taught him.
instead of this, his moral conceptions fall far below those of his models.
in the _phaedra_ of greek tragedy we have that chastened and pathetic
thought, which hangs like a burden on the greek mind, a thought laden with
sadness, but a sadness big with rich fruit of reflection; the thought of
guilt unnatural, involuntary, imposed on the sufferer for some inscrutable
reason by the mysterious dispensation of heaven. helen, the queen of
ancient song, is the offspring of this thought; phaedra in another way is
its offspring too. but as virgil had degraded helen, so seneca degrades
phaedra. her love for hippolytus is the coarse sensual craving of a
common-place adulteress. the language in which it is painted, stripped of
its ornament, is revolting. as dido dwells on the broad chest and
shoulders of aeneas, [83] so phaedra dwells on the healthy glow of
hippolytus's cheek, his massive neck, his sinewy arms. the roman ladies
who bestowed their caresses on gladiators and slaves are here speaking
through their courtly mouthpiece. the gross, the animal--it is scarcely
even sensuous--predominates all through these tragedies. truly the greeks
in teaching rome to desire beauty had little conception of the fierceness
of that robust passion for self-indulgence which they had taught to speak
the language of aesthetic love!

a feature worth noticing in these dramas is the descriptive power and
brilliant philosophy of the choruses. they are quite unconnected with the
plot, and generally either celebrate the praises of some god, _e.g._,
bacchus in the _oedipus_, or descant on some moral theme, as the advantage
of an obscure lot, in the same play. the _eclat_ of their style, and the
pungency of their epigrams is startling. in sentiment and language they
are the very counterpart of his other works. the doctrine of fate,
preached by lucan as well as by seneca in other places, is here inculcated
with every variety of point. [84] we quote a few lines from the _oedipus_:

  fatis agimur: cedite fatis.
  non sollicitae possunt curae
  mutare rati stamina fusi
  quicquid patimur, mortale genus,
  quicquid facimus venit ex alto;
  servatque suae decreta colus
  lachesis, dura revoluta manu.
  omnia certo tramite vadunt,
  primusque dies dedit extremum.
  non illa deo vertisse licet
  quae nexa suis currunt causis.
  it cuique ratus, prece non ulla
    mobilis, ordo.

here we have in all its naked repulsiveness the stoic theory of
predestination. prayer is useless; god is unable to influence events;
lachesis the wrinkled beldame, or fate, her blind symbol, has once for all
settled the inevitable nexus of cause and effect.

the rhythm of these plays is extremely monotonous. the greater part of
each is in the iambic trimeter; the choruses generally in anapaests, of
which, however, he does not understand the structure. the _synaphea_
peculiar to this metre is neglected by him, and the rule that each system
should close with a _paroemiac_ or _dimeter catalectic_ is constantly
violated.

with regard to the _octavia_, it has been thought to be a product of some
mediaeval imitator; but this is hardly likely. it cannot be seneca's,
since it alludes to the death of nero. besides its style is simpler and
less bombastic and shows a much tenderer feeling; it is also infinitely
less clever. altogether it seems best to assign it to the conclusion of
the first century.

the only other work of seneca's which shows a poetical form is the
_apokolokyntosis_ or "pumpkinification" of the emperor claudius, a bitter
satire on the apotheosis of that heavy prince. seneca had been compelled,
much against the grain, to offer him the incense of flattery while he
lived. he therefore revenged himself after claudius's death by this sorry
would-be satire. the only thing witty in it is the title; it is a mixture
of prose and verse, and possesses just this interest for us, that it is
the only example we possess of the menippean satire, unless we refer the
work of petronius to this head.




chapter iii.

the reigns of caligula, claudius, and nero.


2. prose writers--seneca.

of all the imperial writers except tacitus, seneca is beyond comparison
the most important. his position, talents, and influence make him a
perfect representative of the age in which he lived. his career was long
and chequered: his experience brought him into contact with nearly every
phase of life. he was born at cordova 3 a.d. and brought by his indulgent
father as a boy to rome. his early studies were devoted to rhetoric, of
which he tells us he was an ardent learner. every day he was the first at
school, and generally the last to leave it. while still a young man he
made so brilliant a name at the bar as to awaken caligula's jealousy. by
his father's advice he retired for a time, and, having nothing better to
do, spent his days in philosophy. seneca was one of those ardent natures
the virgin soil of whose talent shows a luxurious richness unknown to the
harassed brains of an old civilisation. his enthusiasm for philosophy
exceeded all bounds. he first became a stoic. but stoicism was not severe
enough for his taste. he therefore turned pythagorean, and abstained for
several years from everything but herbs. his father, an old man of the
world, saw that self-denial like this was no less perilous than his former
triumphs. "why do you not, my son," he said, "why do you not live as
others live? there is a provocation in success, but there is a worse
provocation in ostentatious abstinence. you might be taken for a jew (he
meant a christian). do not draw down the wrath of jove." the young
enthusiast was wise enough to take the hint. he at once dressed himself
_en mode_, resumed a moderate diet, only indulging in the luxury of
abstinence from wine, perfumes, warm baths, and made dishes! he was now 35
years of age; in due time caligula died, and he resumed his pleadings at
the bar. he was appointed quaestor by claudius, and soon opened a school
for youths of quality, which was very numerously attended. his social
successes were striking, and brought him into trouble. he was suspected of
improper intimacy with julia, the daughter of germanicus, and in 41 a.d.
was exiled to corsica. this was the second blow to his career. but it was
a most fortunate one for his genius. in the lonely solitudes of a
barbarous island he meditated deeply over the truth of that philosophy to
which his first devotion had been given, and no doubt struck out the germs
of that mild and catholic form of it which has made his teaching, with all
its imperfections, the purest and noblest of antiquity. while there he
wrote many of the treatises that have come down to us, besides others that
are lost. the earliest in all probability is the _consolatio ad marciam_,
addressed to the daughter of cremutius cordus, which seems to have been
written even before his exile. next come two other _consolationes_. the
first is addressed to polybius, the powerful freedman of claudius. it is
full of the most abject flattery, uttered in the hope of procuring his
recall from banishment. that seneca did not object to write to order is
unhappily manifest from his panegyric on claudius, delivered by nero,
which was so fulsome that, even while the emperor recited it, those who
heard could not control their laughter. the second _consolation_ is to his
mother helvia, whom he tenderly loved; and this is one of the most
pleasing of his works. already he is beginning to assume the tone of a
philosopher. his work _de ira_ must be referred to the commencement of
this period, shortly after caligula's death. it bears all the marks of
inexperience, though its eloquence and brilliancy are remarkable. he
enforces the stoic thesis that anger is not an emotion, just in itself and
often righteously indulged, but an evil passion which must be eradicated.
this view which, if supported on grounds of mere expediency, has much to
recommend it, is here defended on _a priori_ principles without much real
reflection, and was quite outgrown by him when taught by the experience of
riper years. in the _constantio sapientis_ he praises and holds up to
imitation the absurd apathy recommended by stilpo. in the _de animi
tranquillitate_, addressed to annaeus serenus, the captain of nero's body-
guard, [1] he adopts the same line of thought, but shows signs of limiting
its application by the necessities of circumstances. the person to whom
this dialogue is addressed, though praised by seneca, seems to have been
but a poor philosopher. in complaisance to the emperor he went so far as
to attract to himself the infamy which nero incurred by his amours with a
courtesan named acte; and his end was that of a glutton rather than a
sage. at a large banquet he and many of his guests were poisoned by eating
toadstools! [2]

it was messalina who had procured seneca's exile. when agrippina succeeded
to her influence he was recalled. this ambitious woman, aware of his
talents and pliant disposition, and perhaps, as dio insinuates, captivated
by his engaging person, contrived to get him appointed tutor to her son,
the young nero, now heir-apparent to the throne. this was a post of which
he was not slow to appropriate the advantages. he rose to the praetorship
(50 a.d.) and soon after to the consulship, and in the short space of four
years amassed an enormous fortune. [3] this damaging circumstance gave
occasion to his numerous enemies to accuse him before nero; and though
seneca in his defence [4] attributed all his wealth to the unsought bounty
of his prince, yet it is difficult to believe it was honestly come by,
especially as he must have been well paid for the numerous violations of
his conscience to which out of regard to nero he submitted. seneca is a
lamentable instance of variance between precept and example. [5] the
authentic bust which is preserved of him bears in its harassed expression
unmistakable evidence of a mind ill at ease. and those who study his works
cannot fail to find many indications of the same thing, though the very
energy which results from such unhappiness gives his writings a deeper
power.

the works written after his recall show a marked advance in his
conceptions of life. he is no longer the abstract dogmatist, but the
supple thinker who finds that there is room for the philosopher in the
world, at court, even in the inner chamber of the palace. to this period
are to be referred his three books _de clementia_, which are addressed to
nero, and contain many beautiful and wholesome precepts; his _de vita
beata_, addressed to his brother novatus (the gallio of the acts of the
apostles), and perhaps the admirable essay _de beneficiis_. this, however,
more probably dates a few years later (60-62 a.d.). it is full of
digressions and repetitions, a common fault of his style, but contains
some very powerful thought. the animus that dictates it is thought by
charpentier to be the desire to release himself from all sense of
obligation to nero. it breathes protest throughout; it proves that a
tyrant's benefits are not kindnesses. it gives what we may call _a
casuistry of gratitude_. other philosophical works now lost are the
_exhortationes_, the _de officiis_, an essay on premature death, one on
superstition, in which he derided the popular faith, one on friendship,
some books on moral philosophy, on remedies for chance casualties, on
poverty and compassion. he wrote also a biography of his father, many
political speeches delivered by nero, a panegyric on messalina, and a
collection of letters to novatus.

the stoics affected to despise physical studies, or at any rate to
postpone them to morals. seneca shared this edifying but far from
scientific persuasion. but after his final withdrawal from court, as the
wonders of nature forced themselves on his notice, he reconsidered his old
prejudice, and entered with ardour on the contemplation of physical
phenomena. besides the _naturales quaestiones_, a great part of which
still remain, he wrote a treatise _de motu terrarum_, begun in his youth
but revised in his old age, and essays on the properties of stones and
fishes, besides monographs on india and egypt, and a short fragment on
"the form of the universe." these, however, only occupied a portion of his
time, the chief part was given to self-improvement and those beautiful
letters to lucilius which are the most important remains of his works.
since the death of burrus, who had helped him to influence nero for good,
or at least to mitigate the atrocious tendencies of his disposition,
seneca had known that his position was insecure. a prince who had killed
first his cousin and then his mother, would not be likely to spare his
preceptor. seneca determined to forestall the danger. he presented himself
at the palace, and entreated nero to receive back the wealth he had so
generously bestowed. instead of complying, nero, in a speech full of
specious respect, but instinct with latent malignity, refused to accept
the proffered gift. the ex-minister knew that his doom was sealed. he at
once relinquished all the state in which he had lived, gave no more
banquets, held no more levees, but abandoned himself to a voluntary
poverty, writing and reading, and practising the asceticism of his school.
but this submission did not at all satisfy nero's vengeance. he made an
insidious attempt to poison his old friend. this was revealed to seneca,
who henceforth ate nothing but herbs which he gathered with his own hand,
and drank only from a spring that rose in his garden. soon afterwards
occurred the conspiracy of piso, and this gave his enemies a convenient
excuse for accusing him. it is impossible to believe that he was guilty.
nero's thirst for his blood is a sufficient motive for his condemnation.
he was bidden to prepare for death, which he accordingly did with alacrity
and firmness. in the fifteenth book of the annals of tacitus is related
with that wondrous power which is peculiar to its author, the dramatic
scene which closed the sage's life. the best testimony to his domestic
virtue is the deep affection of his young wife paulina. refusing all
entreaty, she resolutely determined to die with her husband. they opened
their veins together; she fainted away, and was removed by her friends and
with difficulty restored to life; he, after suffering excruciating agony,
which he endured with cheerfulness, discoursing to his friends on the
glorious realities to which he was about to pass, was at length suffocated
by the vapour of a stove. thus perished one of the weakest and one of the
most amiable of men; one who, had he had the courage to abjure public
life, would have been reverenced by posterity in the same degree that his
talent has been admired. as it is, he has always found severe judges. dio
cassius soon after his death wrote a biography, in which all his acts
received a malignant interpretation. quintilian disliked him, and harshly
criticised his literary defects. the pedant fronto did the same. tacitus,
with a larger heart, made allowance for his temptations, and while never
glossing over his unworthy actions, has yet shown his love for the man in
spite of all by the splendid tribute he pays to the constancy of his
death.

the position of seneca, both as a philosopher and as a man of letters, is
extremely important, and claims attentive consideration in both these
relations. as a philosopher he is usually called a stoic. in one sense
this appellation is correct. when he places himself under any banner it is
always that of zeno. nevertheless it would be a great error to regard him
as a stoic in the sense in which brutus, cato, and thrasea, were stoics.
like all the greatest roman thinkers he was an eclectic; he belonged in
reality to no school. he was the successor of such men as scipio, ennius,
and cicero, far more than of the rigid thinkers of the porch. he himself
says, "nullius nomen fero." [6] the systematic teachers of the roman
school, as distinct from those who were rather patriots than philosophers,
had become more and more liberal in their speculative tenets, more and
more at one upon the great questions of practice. since the time of cicero
philosophic thought had been flowing steadily in one direction. it had
learnt the necessity of appealing to men's hearts rather than convincing
their intellects. it had become a system of persuasion. fabianus was the
first who clearly proposed to himself, as an end, to gain over the
affections or to arouse the conscience. he was succeeded, under tiberius,
by sotion the pythagorean and attalus the stoic, [7] of both of whom
seneca had been an ardent pupil. demetrius the cynic, in a ruder way, had
worked for the same object. [8] in this gradual convergence of diverse
schools metaphysics were necessarily put aside, and ethics occupied the
first and only place. each school claimed for itself the best men of all
schools. "he is a stoic," [9] says seneca, "even though he denies it." the
great conclusions of abstract thought brought to light in greece were now
to be tested in their application to life. "the remedies of the soul have
been discovered long ago; it is for us to learn how to apply them." such
is the grand text on which the system of seneca is a comment. this system
demands, above all things, a knowledge of the human heart. and it is
astonishing how penetrating is the knowledge that seneca displays. his
varied experience opened to him many avenues of observation closed to the
majority. his very position, as at once a great statesman and a great
moralist, naturally attracted men to him. and he used his opportunities
with signal adroitness. but his ability was not the only reason of this
peculiar insight. cicero was as able; but cicero had it not. his thoughts
were occupied with other questions, and do not penetrate into the recesses
of the soul. the reason is to be found in the circumstances of the time.
for a man to succeed in life under a _regime_ of mutual distrust, which he
himself bitterly compares to the forced friendship of the gladiatorial
school, a deep study of character was indispensable. wealth could no
longer be imported: [10] it could only be redistributed. to gain wealth
was to despoil one's neighbour. and the secret of despoiling one's
neighbour was to understand his weakness: if possible, to detect his
hidden guilt. not seneca only but all the great writers of the empire show
a marked familiarity with the _pathology_ of mind.

seneca tells us that he loves teaching above all things else; that if he
loves knowledge it is that he may impart it. [11] for teaching there is
one indispensable prerequisite, and two possible domains. the prerequisite
is certainty of one's self, the domains are those of popular instruction
and of private direction. seneca tries first of all to ensure his own
conviction. "not only," he says, "do i believe all i say, but i love it."
[12] he tries to make his published teachings as real as possible by
assuming a conversational tone. [13] they have the piquancy, the
discursiveness, the brilliant flavour of the salon. they recall the
converse of those gifted men who pass from theme to theme, throwing light
on all, but not exhausting any. but seneca is the last man to assume the
sage. except pedantry, nothing is so alien from him as the assumption of
goodness. "when i praise virtue do not suppose i am praising myself, but
when i blame vice, then believe that it is myself i blame." [14]

thus confident but unassuming, he proceeds to the communication of wisdom.
and of the two domains, while he acknowledges both to be legitimate, [15]
he himself prefers the second. he is no writer for the crowd; his chosen
audience is a few selected spirits. to such as these he wished to be
director of conscience, guide, and adviser in all matters, bodily as well
as spiritual. this was the calling for which, like fenelon, he felt the
keenest desire, the fullest aptitude. we see his power in it when we read
his _consolations_; we see the intimate sympathy which dives into the
heart of his friend. in the letters to lucilius, and in the _tranquillity
of the soul_, this is most conspicuous. serenus had written complaining of
a secret unhappiness or malady, he knew not which, that preyed upon his
mind and frame, and would not let him enjoy a moment's peace. seneca
analyses his complaint, and expounds it with a vivid clearness which
betrays a first-hand acquaintance with its symptoms. if to that anguish of
a spirit that preys on itself could be added the pains of a yearning
unknown to antiquity, we might say that seneca was enlightening or
comforting a werther or a rene. [16]

seneca's object, therefore, was remedial; to discover the malady and apply
the restorative. the good teacher is _artifex vivendi_. [17] he does not
state principles, he gives minute precepts for every circumstance of life.
here we see casuistry entering into morals, but it is casuistry of a noble
sort. to be effective precepts must be repeated, and with every variety of
statement. "to knock once at the door when you come at night is never
enough; the blow must be hard, and it must be seconded. [18] repetition is
not a fault, it is a necessity." here we see the lecturer emphasising by
reiteration what he has to say.

and what has he to say? his system taken in its main outlines is rigid
enough; the quenching of all emotion, the indifference to all things
external, the prosecution of virtue alone, the mortification of the body
and its desires, the adoption of voluntary poverty. these are views not
only severe in themselves, but views which we are surprised to see a man
like seneca inculcate. the truth is he does not really inculcate them. in
theory rigid, his system _practises_ easily. it is more full of
concessions than any other system that was ever broached. it is the
inevitable result of an ambitious creed that when applied to life it
should teem with inconsistencies. seneca deserves praise for the
conspicuous cleverness with which he steers over such dangerous shoals.
the rigours of "virtue unencumbered" might be preached to a patrician
whose honoured name made obscurity impossible; but as for the freedmen,
capitalists, and _nouveaux riches_ [19] of all kinds, who were seneca's
friends, if poverty was necessary for virtue, where would they be? their
greatness was owing solely to their wealth. thus he wisely offered them a
more accommodating doctrine, viz., that riches being indifferent need not
be given up, that the good rich man differs from the bad in spirit, not in
externals, &c., palliatives with which we are all familiar. to take
another instance. the stoic system forbade all emotion. yet we find the
philosopher weeping for his wife, for his child, for his slave. but he was
far too sensible not to recognise the nobleness of such expressions of
feeling; so he contents himself with saying "_indulgeantur non
imperentur_." [20]

in reading the letters we are struck by the continual reference to the
insecurity of riches, the folly of fearing death, torture, or infamy, and
are tempted to regard these as mere commonplaces of the schools. they had,
however, a melancholy fitness at the time they were uttered, which we,
fortunately, cannot realise. a french gentleman, quoted by boissier, [21]
declared that he found the moral letters tedious until the reign of terror
came; that then, being in daily peril of his life, he understood their
searching power. at the same time this power is not consistent; the
vacillation of the author's mind communicates itself to the person
addressed, and the clear grasp of a definite principle which lent such
strength to zeno and the early stoics is indefinitely diluted in the far
more eloquent and persuasive reflections of his roman representative.

connected with the name of seneca is a question of surpassing interest,
which it would be unjust to our readers to pass entirely by. we allude to
the belief universal in the church from the time of jerome until the
sixteenth century, and in spite of strong disproof, not yet by any means
altogether given up, that seneca was personally acquainted with st. paul,
[22] and borrowed some of his noblest thoughts from the apostle's
teaching. the first testimony to this belief is given by jerome, [23] who
assigns, as his sole and convincing reason for naming seneca among the
worthies of the church that his correspondence with paul was extant. this
correspondence, which will be found in haase's edition of the philosopher,
is now admitted on all hands to be a forgery. but we might naturally ask;
does it not point to an actual correspondence which is lost, the
traditional remembrance of which gave rise to its later fictitious
reproduction? to this the answer must be: jerome knew of no such early
tradition. all he knew was that the letters existed, and on their
existence, which he did not critically investigate, he founded his claim
to admit seneca within the church's pale.

the problem is by no means so simple as it appears. it involves two
separate questions: first, a historical one which has only an antiquarian
interest, did the philosopher know the apostle? secondly, a more important
one for the history of religious thought, do seneca's writings contain
matter which could have come from no source but the teaching of the first
christians.

as regards the first question, the arguments on both sides are as
follows:--on the one hand, gallio, who saw paul at corinth, was seneca's
brother, and burrus, the captain of the praetorian cohort, before whom he
was brought at rome, was seneca's most intimate friend. what so likely as
that these men should have introduced their prisoner to one whose chief
object was to find out truth? again, there is a well authenticated
tradition that acte, once the concubine of nero, [24] and the only person
who was found to bury him, was a convert to the christian faith; and if
converted, who so likely to have been her converter as the great apostle?
moreover, in the epistle to the philippians, st. paul salutes "them that
are of caesar's household," and it is thought that seneca may here be
specially intended. on the other side it is argued that the phrase,
"caesar's household," can only refer to slaves and freedmen: to apply it
to a great magistrate at a time when as yet noblemen had not become body-
servants or grooms of the chamber to the monarch, would have been nothing
short of an insult; that seneca, if he had heard of paul or of paul's
master, would naturally have mentioned the fact, communicative as he
always is; that fear of persecution certainly need not have restrained
him, especially since he rather liked shocking people's ideas than
otherwise; that everywhere he shows contempt and nothing but contempt for
the jews, among whom as yet the christians were reckoned; in short, that
he appears to know nothing whatever of christians or their doctrines.

as to this latter point there is room for difference of opinion. it is by
no means clear that christianity was unknown to the court in nero's reign.
we find in suetonius [25] a notice to the effect that claudius banished
the jews from rome for a sedition headed by _chrestus_. how suetonius knew
well enough that christus, not chrestus, was the name of the founder of
the new religion; it is therefore reasonable to suppose that in this
passage he is quoting from a police-magistrate's report dating from the
time of claudius. again, it is certain that under nero the christians were
known as an unpopular sect, on whom he might safely wreak his mock
vengeance for the burning of the city; and it is equally certain that his
abominable cruelty excited a warm sympathy among the people for the
persecuted. [26] the jews were well known; hundreds practised their
ceremonies in secret; even as early as horace [27] we know that sabbaths
were kept, and the mosaic doctrines taught to noble men and women. the
penalties inflicted on these innocent victims must have been at least
talked of in rome, and it is more than probable that seneca must have been
familiar with the name of the despised sect. [28] so far, therefore, we
must leave the question open, only stating that while the balance of
probability is decidedly against seneca's having had any personal
knowledge of the apostle, it is in favour of his having at least heard of
the religion he represented.

with regard to the second question, whether seneca's teaching owes
anything to christianity, we must first observe, that philosophy to him
was altogether a question of practice. like all the other thinkers of the
time he cared nothing for consistency of opinion, everything for
impressiveness of application. he was stoic, platonist, epicurean, as
often as it suited him to employ their principles to enforce a moral
lesson. thus in his _naturales quaestiones_, [29] where he has no moral
object in view, he speaks of the deity as _mens universi_, or _natura
ipsa_, quite in accordance with stoic pantheism. but in the letters to
lucilius, which are wholly moral, he uses the language of religion: "the
great soul is that which yields itself up to god;" [30] "all that pleases
him is good;" [31] "he is a friend never far off;" [32] "he is our
father;" [33] "it is from him that great and good resolutions come;" [34]
"he is worshipped and loved;" [35] "prayer is a witness to his care for
us." [36] there is no doubt in these passages a strong resemblance to the
teaching of the new testament. there are other points of contact hardly
less striking. the stoic doctrine of the soul affirms the cessation of
existence after death. so zeno taught; but chrysippus allowed the souls of
the good an existence until the end of the world, and cleanthes extended
this privilege to all souls alike. seneca sometimes speaks as a stoic,
[37] and denies immortality: sometimes he admits it as an ennobling
belief; [38] sometimes he declares it to be his own conviction, [39] and
uses the beautiful expression, so common in christian literature, that the
day of death is the birth-day of eternity. [40] the coincidence, if it is
nothing more than a coincidence, is marvellous. but before assuming any
closer connection we must take these passages with their respective
contexts, and with the principles which, whether consistently maintained
or not, undoubtedly underlie his whole teaching. we must remember that if
seneca had known the gospel, the day he first heard of it must have been
an epoch in his life. [41] and yet we meet with no allusion which could be
construed into an admission of such a debt. and besides, the expressions
in question do not all belong to one period of the philosopher's life;
they occur in his earliest as well as in his latest compositions, though
doubtless far more frequently in the latter. hence we may explain them
partly by the natural progress in enlightenment and gentleness during the
century from cicero to seneca, and partly also by the moral development of
the philosopher himself. [42] resemblances of terms, however striking,
must not count for more than they are worth. it is more important to ask
whether the _spirit_ of seneca's teaching is at all like that of the
gospel. are his ideas christian? we meet with strong recommendations to
charity, kindness, benevolence. to a splenetic acquaintance, out of humour
with the world, he cries out, _ecquando amabis_? "when will you learn to
love?" [43] but with him charity is not an end; it is but a means to
fortify the sage, to render him absolutely self-sufficient. _egoism_ is at
the bottom of this high precept; [44] and this at once removes it from the
christian category. and the same is true of his account of the wise man's
relations to god. they are based on _pride_, not humility; they make him
an equal, not a servant, of the deity: _sapiem cum dis ex pari trivit_;
[45] and again, _deo socius non supplex_. [46] nothing could be further
from the new testament than this. if therefore seneca borrowed anything
from christianity, it was the morality, not the doctrines, that he
borrowed. but this is no sooner stated than it is seen to be altogether
inconceivable. to suppose that he took from it precepts of life and
neglected the higher truths it announced, is to regard him as foolish or
blind. with his intense yearning to penetrate to the mysteries of our
being, it is impossible that the only solution of them offered as certain
to the world should have been neglected by him as not worth a thought.
[47]

we therefore conclude that seneca received no assistance from the
preachers of the new religion, that his philosophy was the natural
development of the thoughts of his predecessors in a mind at once
capacious and smitten with the love of virtue. he cannot be regarded as an
isolated phenomenon; he was made by the ages, as he in his turn helped to
make the ages that followed; and if we possessed the writings of those
intermediate thinkers who busily wrought among the citizens of rome,
striving by persuasion, precept, and example, to wean them from their
sensuality and violence, we should probably see in seneca's thoughts a
less astounding individuality than we do.

it has often been said that he prepared the way for christianity. but even
this is hard to defend. in his enunciation of the brotherhood of man, [48]
of the unholiness of war, [49] of the sanctity of human life, [50] of the
rights of slaves, [51] and their claims to our affection, [52] in his
reprobation of gladiatorial shows, he holds the place of a moral pioneer,
the more honourable, since none of those before him, except cicero, had
had largeness of heart enough to recognise these truths. by his fierce
attacks on paganism, [53] for which (not being a born roman) he has no
sympathy and no mercy, he did good service to the pure creed that was to
follow. by his contempt of science, [54] in which he asserts we can never
be more than children, he paved the way for a recognition of the supremacy
of the moral end; but at the same time his own mind is sceptical quite as
much as it is religious. he resembles cicero far more than virgil. the
current after augustus ran towards belief and even credulity. seneca
arrests rather than forwards it. his philosophy was the proudest that ever
boasted of its claims, "promittit ut parem deo faciat." [55] his
popularity was excessive, especially with the young and wealthy members of
the new nobility of freedmen. the old romans avoided him, and his great
successors in philosophy, epictetus and marcus aurelius, never even
mention his name.

as a man of letters seneca wielded an incalculable influence. what lucan
did for poetry, he did for prose, or rather, he did far more; while lucan
never superseded virgil as a model except for expression, seneca not only
superseded cicero, but set the style in which every succeeding author
either wrote, tried to write, or tried _not_ to write. to this there is
one exception--the younger pliny. but florus, tacitus, pliny the elder,
and curtius, are deeply imbued with his manner and style. quintilian,
though anxiously eschewing all imitation of him, continually falls into
it; there was a charm about those short, incisive sentences which none who
had read them could resist; as tacitus well says, there was in him
_ingenium amoenum et temporis eius auribus accommodatum_. it is in vain
that quintilian goes out of his way to bewail his broken periods, his
wasted force, his sweet vices. the words of seneca are like those
described in ecclesiastes, "they are as goads or as nails driven in."
there is no possibility of missing their point, no fear of the attention
not being arrested. if he repeats over and over again, that is after all a
fault that can be pardoned, especially when each repetition is more
brilliant than its predecessor. and considering the end he proposed to
himself, viz., to teach those who as yet were "novices in wisdom," we can
hardly regard such a mode of procedure as beside the mark. where it fails
is in what touches seneca himself, not in what touches the reader. it is a
style which does injustice to its author's heart. its glitter strikes us
as false because too brilliant to be true; a man in earnest would not stop
to trick his thoughts in the finery of rhetoric; here as ever, the showy
stands for the bad. we do not intend to defend the character of the man;
if style be the true reflex of the soul, as in all great writers without
doubt it is, we allow that seneca's style shows a mind wanting in gravity,
that is, in the highest roman excellence. his is the bright enthusiasm of
display, not the steady one of duty; but though it be lower it need not be
less real. there are warriors who meet their death with a song and a gay
smile; there are others who meet it with stern and sober resolve. but
courage calls both her children. christian europe has been kinder and
juster to seneca than was pagan rome. rome while she copied, abused him.
neither as spaniard nor as roman can he claim the name of sage. the higher
philosophy is denied to both these nations. but in brilliancy of touch, in
delicious _abandon_ of sparkling chat, all the more delightful because it
does us good in genial human feeling, none the less warm, because it is
masked by quaint apophthegms and startling paradoxes, seneca stands
_facile princeps_ among the writers of the empire. his works are a mine of
quotation, of anecdote, of caustic observations on life. in no other
writer shall we see so speaking a picture of the struggle between duty and
pleasure, between virtue and ambition; from no other writer shall we gain
so clear an insight into the hopes, fears, doubts, and deep, abiding
dissatisfaction which preyed upon the better spirits of the age.




chapter iv.

the reigns of caligula, claudius, and nero.


3. other prose writers.

we have dwelt fully on seneca because he is of all the claudian writers
the one best fitted to appear as a type of the time. there were, however,
several others of more or less note who deserve a short notice. there is
the historian domitius corbulo, [1] who wrote under caligula (39 a.d.) a
history of his campaigns in asia, and to whom pliny refers as an authority
on topographical and ethnographical questions. he was executed by nero (67
a.d.) and his wealth confiscated to the crown.

another historian is quintus curtius, whose date has been disputed, some
placing him as early as augustus, in direct contradiction to the evidence
of his style, which is moulded on that of seneca, and of his political
ideas, which are those of hereditary monarchy. others again place him as
late as the time of severus, an opinion to which niebuhr inclined. but it
is more probable that he lived in the time of claudius and the early years
of nero. [2] his work is entitled _historiae alexandri magni_, and is
drawn from clitarchus, timagenes, and ptolomaeus. it consisted of ten
books, of which all but the first two have come down to us. he paid more
attention to style than matter, showing neither historical criticism nor
original research, but putting down everything that looked well in the
relating, even though he himself did not believe it.

spain was at this time very rich in authors. for more than half a century
she gave the empire most of its greatest names. the entire epoch has been
called that of spanish latinity. l. junius moderatus columella was born at
gades, probably [3] near the beginning of our era. his grandfather was a
man of substance in that part of the province, and a most successful
farmer; it was from him that he imbibed that love of agricultural pursuits
which led him to write his learned and elegant treatise. this treatise,
which has come down to us entire, and consists of twelve books, was
intended to form part of an exhaustive treatment of the subject of
agriculture, including the incidental questions (_e.g._ those of religion)
[4] connected with it. it was expanded and improved from a smaller essay,
of which we still possess certain fragments. the work is written in a
clear, comprehensive way, drawn not only from the best authorities, but
from the author's personal experience. like a true roman (it is
astonishing how fully these provincials entered into the mind of rome) he
descants on the dignity of the subject, on the lapse from old virtue, on
the idleness of men who will not labour on their land and draw forth its
riches, and on the necessity of taking up husbandry in a practical
business-like way. the tenth book, which treats of gardens, is written in
smooth verse, closely imitated from the _georgics_. it is in fact intended
as a fifth _georgic. virgil had said [5] with reference to gardens:

  "verum haec ipse equidem spatiis exclusus iniqnis
  praetereo, atque aliis post me memoranda relinquo."

these words are an oracle to columella. "i should have written my tenth
book in prose," he says, "had not your frequent requests that i would fill
up what was wanting to the _georgics_ got the better of my resolution.
even so, i should not have ventured on poetry if virgil had not indicated
that he wished it to be done. inspired, therefore, by his divine
influence, i have approached my slender theme." the verses are good,
though their poetical merit is somewhat on the level of a university prize
poem. they conclude thus:

  "hactenus arvorum cultus silvine docebam
  siderei referens vatis praecepta maronis."

among scientific writers we possess a treatise by scribonius largus (47
a.d.) on _compositiones medicae_, which is characterised by teuffel as
"not altogether nonsensical, and in tolerable style, although tinged with
the general superstition of the period." the critic q. asconius pedianus
(3-88 a.d.) is more important. he devoted his life to an elaborate
exegesis of the great latin classics, more particularly cicero. his
commentary on the _orations_, of which we possess considerable fragments,
[6] is written with sound sense, and in a clear pointed style. some
commentaries on the _verrine speeches_ which bear his name, are the work
of a much later hand, though perhaps drawn in great part from him. another
series of notes, extending to a considerable number of orations, was
discovered by mai, [7] but these also have been retouched by a later hand.

an interesting treatise on primitive geography, manners and customs
(_chronographia_) which we still possess, was written by pomponius mela,
of tingentera in spain. like curtius he has obviously imitated seneca; his
account is too concise, but he intended and perhaps carried out elsewhere
a fuller treatment of the subject.

the two studies which despotism had done so much to destroy, oratory and
jurisprudence, still found a few votaries. the chief field for speaking
was the senate, where men like crispus, eprius marcellus, and suillius the
accuser of seneca, exercised their genius in adroit flattery. thrasea,
helvidius, and the opposition, were compelled to study repression rather
than fulness. as jurists we hear of few eminent names: proculus and
cassius longinus are the most prominent.

grammar was successfully cultivated by valerius probus, who undertook the
critical revision of the texts of the latin classics, much as the
alexandrine grammarians had done for those of greece. he was originally
destined for public life, but through want of success betook himself to
study. after his arrival at rome he gave public lectures on philology,
which were numerously attended, and he seems to have retained the
affection of all his pupils. his oral notes were afterwards edited in an
epistolary form. the work _de notis antiquis_, or at least a portion of
it, _de iuris notis_, has come down to us in a slightly abridged form;
also a short treatise called _catholica_, treating of the noun and verb,
though it is uncertain whether this is authentic. [8] another work on
grammar is attributed to him, but as it is evidently at least three
centuries later than this date, several critics have supposed it to be by
a second probus, also a grammarian, who lived at that period.

we shall conclude the chapter with a notice of an extraordinary book, the
_satires_, which pass under the name of petronius arbiter. who he was is
not certainly known; but there was a petronius in the time of nero, whose
death (66 a.d.), is recorded by tacitus, [9] and who is generally
identified with him. this account has often been quoted; nevertheless we
may insert it here: "his days were passed in sleep, his nights in business
and enjoyment. as others rise to fame by industry, so he by idleness; and
he gained the reputation, not like most spendthrifts of a profligate or
glutton, but of a cultured epicure. his words and deeds were welcomed as
models of graceful simplicity in proportion as they were morally lax and
ostentatiously indifferent to appearances. while proconsul, however, in
bithynia he showed himself vigorous and equal to affairs. then turning to
vice, or perhaps simulating it, he became a chosen intimate of nero, and
his prime authority (_arbiter_) in all matters of taste, so that he
thought nothing delicate or charming except what petronius had approved.
this raised the envy of tigellinus, who regarded him as a rival purveyor
of pleasure preferred to himself. consequently he traded on the cruelty of
nero, a vice to which all others gave place, by accusing petronius of
being a friend to scaevinus, having bribed a slave to give the
information, and removed the means of defence by hurrying almost all
petronius's slaves into prison. caesar was then in campania, and
petronius, who had gone to cumae, was arrested there. he determined not to
endure the suspense of hope and fear. but he did not hurry out of life; he
opened his veins gently, and binding them up from time to time, chatted
with his friends, not on serious topics or such as might procure him the
fame of constancy, nor did he listen to any conversation on immortality or
the doctrines of philosophers, but only to light verses on easy themes. he
pensioned some of his slaves, chastised others. he feasted and lay down to
rest, that his compulsory death might seem a natural one. in his will he
did not, like most of the condemned, flatter nero, or tigellinus, or any
of the powerful, but satirized the emperor's vices under the names of
effeminate youths and women, giving a description of each new kind of
debauchery. these he sealed and sent to nero." many have thought that in
the _satires_ we possess the very writing to which tacitus refers. but to
this it is a sufficient answer that they consisted of sixteen books, far
too many to have been written in two days. they must have been prepared
before, and perhaps the most caustic of them were selected for the
emperor's perusal. the fragment that remains is from the fifteenth and
sixteenth books, and is a mixture of verse and prose in excellent
latinity, but deplorably and offensively obscene. nothing can give a
meaner idea of the social culture of rome than this production of one of
her most accomplished masters of self-indulgence. as, however, it is
important from a literary, and still more from an antiquarian point of
view, we add a short analysis of its contents.

the hero is one encolpius, who begins by bewailing to a rhetor named
agamemnon the decline of native eloquence, which his friend admits, and
ascribes to the general laxity of education. while the question is under
discussion encolpius is interrupted and carried off through a variety of
adventures, of which suffice it to say that they are best left in
obscurity, being neither humorous nor moral. another day, he is invited to
dine with the rich freedman trimalchio, under whom, doubtless, some court
favourite of nero is shadowed forth. the banquet and conversation are
described with great vividness. after some preliminary compliments, the
host, eager to display his learning, turns the discourse upon philology;
but he is suddenly called away, and topics of more general interest are
introduced, the guests giving their opinions on each in a sufficiently
interesting way. the remarks of one ganymedes on the sufferings of the
lower classes, the insufficiency of food, and the lack of healthy
industries, are pathetic and true. meanwhile, trimalchio returns, orders a
boar to be killed and cooked, and while this is in preparation entertains
his friends with discussions on rhetoric, medicine, history, art, &c. the
scene becomes animated as the wine flows; various ludicrous incidents
ensue, which are greeted with extemporaneous epigrams in verse, some
rather amusing, others flat and diffuse. the conversation thus turns to
the subject of poetry. cicero and syrus are compared with some ability of
illustration. jests are freely bandied; ghost stories are proposed, and
two marvellous fables related, one on the power of owls to predict events,
the other on a soldier who was changed into a wolf. the supernatural is
then about to be discussed, when a gentleman named habinnas and his portly
wife scintilla come in. this lady exhibits her jewels with much
complacency, and trimalchio's wife fortunata, roused to competition, does
the same. trimalchio has now arrived at that stage of the evening's
entertainment when mournful views of life begin to present themselves. he
calls for the necessary documents, and forthwith proceeds to make his
will. his kind provision for his relatives and dependants, combined with
his after-dinner pathos, bring out the softer side of the company's
feelings; every one weeps, and for a time festivities are suspended. the
terrible insecurity of life under nero is here pointedly hinted at.

the will read, trimalchio takes a bath, and soon returns in excellent
spirits, ready to dine again. at this his good lady takes umbrage, and
something very like a quarrel ensues, on which trimalchio bids the
musicians strike up a dead march. the tumult with which this is greeted is
too much for many of the guests. encolpius, the narrator, leaves the room,
and the party breaks up.

encolpius on leaving trimalchio's meets a poet, eumolpus, who complains
bitterly of poverty and neglect. a debate ensues on the causes of the
decline in painting and the arts; it is attributed to the love of money. a
picture representing the sack of troy gives occasion for a mock-tragic
poem of some length, doubtless aimed at nero's effusions. the poet is
pelted as a bore, and has to decamp in haste. but he is incorrigible. he
returns, and this time brings a still longer and more pretentious poem.
some applaud; others disapprove. encolpius, seized with a fit of
melancholy, thinks of hanging himself, but is persuaded to live by the
artless caresses of a fair boy whom he has loved. several adventures of a
similar kind follow, and the book, which towards the end becomes very
fragmentary, ends without any regular conclusion. enough has been given to
show its general character. it is something between a menippean satire and
a _milesian fable_, such as had been translated from the greek long before
by sisenna, and were to be so successfully imitated in a later age by
apuleius. the narrative goes on from incident to incident without any
particular connexion, and allows all kinds of digressions. poetical
insertions are very frequent, some original, others quoted, many of
considerable elegance. from its central and by many degrees most
entertaining incident the whole satire has been called _the supper of
trimalchio_. we have a few short passages remaining from the lost books,
and some allusions in these we possess enable us to reconstruct to some
extent their argument. it does not seem to have contained anything
specially attractive. if only the book were less offensive, its varied
literary scope and polished conversational style would make it truly
interesting. as it is, the student of ancient manners finds it a mine of
important and out-of-the-way information.


appendix.

note i.--_the testamentum porcelli._

connected with the milesian fables were the testamentum porcelli, short
_jeux d'esprit_, generally in the form of comic anecdotes, as a rule
licentious, but sometimes harmless, and intended for children. a specimen
of the unobjectionable sort is here given. st jerome, who quotes it, says
(contra rufinum, i. 17, p. 473) "_quasi non cirratorum turba milesiarum in
scholis figmenta decantet et testamentum suis bessorum cachinno membra
concutiat, atque inter scurrarum epulas nugae istiusmodi frequententur._"

"_testamentum porcelli._

"incipit testamentum porcelli.

"m. grunnius corocotta porcellus testamentum fecit; quoniam manu mea
scribere non potui, scribendum dictavi. magirus cocus dixit 'veni huc,
eversor domi, solivertiator, fugitive porcelle, et hodie tibi dirimo
vitam.' corocotta porcellus dixit 'si qua feci, si qua peccavi, si qua
vascella pedibus meis confregi, rogo, domine coce, vitam peto, concede
roganti.' magirus cocus dixit 'transi, puer affer mihi de cocina cultrum,
ut hunc porcellum faciam cruentum.' porcellus comprehenditur a famulis,
ductas sub die xvi. kal. luceminas, ubi abundant cymae, clibanato et
piperato consulibus, et ut vidit se moriturum esse, horae spatium petiit
et cocum rogavit ut testamentum facere posset, clamavit ad se suos
parentes, ut de cibariis suis aliquid dimitteret eis. quid ait:

"'patri meo verrino lardino do lego dari glandis modios xxx. et matri meae
veturinae scrofae do lego dari laeonicae siliginis modios xl. et sorori
meae quirinae, in euius votum interesse non potui, do lego dari hordei
modios xxx. et de meis visceribus dabo donabo sutoribus saetas, rixoribus
capitinas, surdis auriculas, causidicis et verbosis linguam, bubulariis
intestina, isiciariis femora, mulieribus lumbulos, pueris vesicam, puellis
caudam, cinaedis musculos, cursoribus et venatoribus talos, latronibus
ungulas, et nec nominando coco legato dimitto popiam et pistillum, quae
mecum attuleram: de tebeste usque ad tergeste liget sibi collo de reste,
et volo mihi fieri monumentum aureis litteris scriptum:' m. grunnius
corocotta porcellus vixit annis dcccc.xc.viiii.s. quod si semissem
vixisset, mille annos implesset, 'optimi amatores mei vel consules vitae,
rogo vos ut cam corpore meo bene faciatis, bene condiatis de bonis
condimentis nuclei, piperis et mellis, ut nomen meum in sempiternum
nominetur, mei domini vel consobrini mei, qui in medio testamento
interfuistis, iubete signari.'

"lardio signavit, ofellicus signavit, cyminatus signavit, tergillus
signavit, celsinus signavit, nuptialisus signavit.

"explicit testamentum porcelli sub die xvi. kal. lucerninas clibanato et
piperato consulibus feliciter."

such ridiculous compositions were extremely popular in court circles
during the corrupter periods of the empire. suetonius (tib. 42) tells us
that tiberius gave one asellius sabinus l1400 for a dialogue in which the
mushroom, the beccaficoe, the oyster, and the thrush advanced their
respective claims to be considered the prince of delicacies. to this age
also belong the collection of epigrams on priapus called _priapea_, and
including many poems attributed to virgil, tibullus, and ovid. they are
mostly of an obscene character, but some few, especially those by tibullus
and catullus which close the series, are simple and pretty. it is almost
inconceivable to us how so disgusting a cultus could have been joined with
innocence of life; but as priapus long maintained his place as a rustic
deity we must suppose that the hideous literalism of his surroundings must
have been got over by ingenious allegorising, or forgotten by rustic
veneration.


note 2.--_on the ms. of petronius._

from thomson's essay on the post-augustan latin poets, from the
_encyclopaedia metropolitana_ (_roman literature_).

fragments of petronius had been printed by bernardinus de vitalibus at
venice in 1499, and by jacobus thanner at leipsig in 1508; but in the year
1632, petrus petitus, or as he styled himself, marinus statilius, a
literary dalmatian, discovered at traw a ms. containing a much more
considerable fragment, which was afterwards published at padua and
amsterdam, and ultimately purchased at rome for the library of the king of
france in the year 1703. the eminent mr. j. b. gail, one of the curators
of this library, politely allowed m. guerard, a young gentleman of
considerable learning employed in the ms. department, to afford us the
following circumstantial information respecting this valuable codex,
classed in the library as 7989:--"it is a small folio two fingers thick,
written on very substantial paper, and in a very legible hand. the titles
are in vermillion; the beginnings of the chapters, &c. are also in
vermillion or blue. it contains the poems of tibullus, propertius and
catullus, as we have them in the ordinary printed editions; then appears
the date of the 20th nov. 1423. after these comes the letter of sappho,
and then the work of petronius. the extracts are entitled 'petronii
arbitri satyri fragmenta et libro quinto decimo et sexto decimo,' and
begin thus: 'cum (not 'num,' as in the printed copies) in alio genere
furiarum declamatores inquietantur,' &c. after these fragments, which
occupy twenty-one pages of the ms. we have a piece without title or
mention of its author, which is _the supper of trimalcio_. it begins thus:
'venerat iam tertius dies,' and ends with the words. 'tam plane quam ex
incendio fugimus.' this piece is complete by itself, and does not recur in
the other extracts. then follows the _moretum_, attributed to virgil, and
afterwards the _phoenix_ of claudian. the latter piece is in the character
of the seventeenth century, while the rest of the ms. is in that of the
fifteenth." the publication of this fragment excited a great sensation
among the learned, to great numbers of whom the original was submitted,
and by far the majority of the judges decided in favour of its antiquity.
strong as was this external evidence, the internal is yet more valuable;
since it is scarcely possible to conceive a forgery of this length, which
would not in some point or other betray itself. the difficulty of forging
a work like the _satyricon_ will better appear, when it is considered that
such attempts have been actually made. a frenchman, named nodot, pretended
that the entire work of petronius had been found at belgrade in the siege
of that town in 1688. the forged ms. was published; but the contempt it
excited was no less universal than the consideration which was shown to
the ms. of statilius. another frenchman, lallemand, printed a pretended
fragment, with notes and a translation, in 1800, but no one was deceived
by it.




chapter v.

the reigns op the flavian emperors (a.d. 69-96).


1. prose writers.

with the extinction of the claudian dynasty we enter on a new literary
epoch. the reigns of vespasian, titus, and domitian produced a series of
writers who all show the same characteristics, though necessarily modified
by the tyranny of domitian's reign as contrasted with the clemency of
those of his two predecessors. under vespasian and titus authors might say
what they chose; both these princes disdained to curb freedom of speech or
to punish it even when it clamoured for martyrdom. yet such was the
reaction from the excitement of the last epoch, that no writer of genius
appeared, and only one of the first eminence in learning. there now comes
into roman literature an unmistakable evidence of reduced talent as well
as of decayed taste. hitherto power at least has not been wanting; but for
the future all is on a weaker scale. only the two great names of juvenal
and tacitus redeem the ninth century of rome from total want of creative
genius. all other writers move in established grooves, and, as a rule,
imitate or feebly rival some of the giants of the past. learning was still
cultivated with assiduity if not with enthusiasm; but the grand hopeful
spirit, sure of discovering truth, which animates the erudition of a
better age, has now given place to a querulous depreciation even of the
labour to which the authors have devoted their lives. this is conspicuous
from the first in the otherwise noble pages of the elder pliny, and is the
secret of that want of critical insight which, in a mind so capaciously
stored, strikes us at first as inexplicable.

this laborious and interesting writer was born at como [1] in the year 23
a.d. he came, it is not known exactly when, to rome and studied under the
rhetorical grammarian apion, whom tiberius in mockery of his sounding
periods had called "the drum" (_tympanum_). till his forty-sixth year
pliny's genius remained unknown. an allusion in his work to lollia paulina
has given rise to the opinion that he was admitted to the court of
caligula, but the grounds for this conclusion are manifestly insufficient.
his nephew states that he composed his treatise _on doubtful words_ [2] to
escape the jealousy of nero, who suspected him of less unambitious
pursuits. but the evidence of the younger pliny serves better to establish
facts than motives; he is always anxious to swell the importance of his
friends; and it is far more likely from pliny's own silence that he
remained in comparative obscurity until nero's death. at the age of
twenty-two he served his first campaign in africa, and soon after in
germany under lucius pomponius, who gave him a cavalry troop, and seems to
have befriended him in various other ways. his promotion was perhaps due
to the treatise _on javelin-throwing_ [3] which be wrote about this time.
he showed his gratitude towards pomponius at a later date by writing his
life.

pliny had always felt a strong interest in science, and determined as soon
as opportunity offered to make its advancement the object of his life.
with this end in view he made careful observations of all the countries he
visited, and used his military position to secure information that
otherwise might have been hard to obtain. he inspected the source of the
danube and travelled among the chauci on the shores of the german ocean.
he visited the mouths of the eber and weser, the north sea and the
cimbrian chersonese, and spent some time among the roman provinces west of
the rhine. while in germany he had a vision in which he saw or thought he
saw the shade of drusus, which appeared to him by night and bade him tell
the history of all the german wars. accordingly, he collected materials
with industry, and worked them up into a large volume, which is now
unfortunately lost. at twenty-nine he left the army and returned to rome,
where he studied for the bar. but his talents were not suitable for
forensic display, and he found a more lucrative field in teaching grammar
and rhetoric. at what time he was sent out as procurator to spain is
uncertain, but when he returned he found vespasian on the throne. pliny,
who had known him in germany, and had been on intimate terms with his son
titus, was now received with the greatest favour. every morning before
day-break, when the busy emperor rose to finish his correspondence before
the work of the day began, he called pliny to his side, and the two
friends chatted awhile together in the plain, homely fashion that
vespasian much preferred to the measured style of court etiquette. nor was
his favour confined to familiar intercourse. he made him admiral of the
fleet stationed at misenum and charged with guarding the mediterranean
ports. it was while here that news was brought him of the eruption of
vesuvius. he sailed to resina determined to investigate the phenomenon,
and, as his nephew in a well-known letter tells us, paid the price of his
scientific curiosity with his life. the letter is so charming, and affords
so good an example of pliny the younger's style, that we may be excused
for inserting: it here. [4]

    "he was at misenum in command of the fleet. on the 24th august (79
    a.d.), about 1 p.m., my mother pointed out to him a cloud of unusual
    size and shape. he had then sunned himself, had his cold bath, tasted
    some food, and was lying down reading. he at once asked for his shoes,
    and mounted a height from which the best view might be obtained. the
    cloud was rising from a mountain afterwards ascertained to have been
    vesuvius; its form was more like a pine-tree than anything else. it
    was raised into the air by what seemed its trunk, and then branched
    out in different directions; the reason probably was that the blast,
    at first irresistible, but afterwards losing strength or unable to
    counteract gravity, spent itself by spreading out on either side. the
    cloud was either bright, or dark and spotty, according as earth or
    ashes were thrown up. as a man of science he determined to inspect the
    phenomenon more closely. he ordered a light vessel to be prepared, and
    offered to take me with him. i replied that i would rather study; as
    it happened, he himself had set me something to write. he was just
    starting, when a letter was brought from rectina imploring aid for
    naseus who was in imminent danger; his villa lay below, and no escape
    was possible except by sea. he now changed his plan, and what he had
    begun, from scientific enthusiasm he carried out with self-sacrificing
    courage. he launched some quadriremes, and embarked with the intention
    of succouring not only rectina but others who lived on that populous
    and picturesque coast. thus he hurried to the spot from which all
    others were flying, and steered straight for the danger, so absolutely
    devoid of fear that he dictated an account with full comments of all
    the movements and changing shapes of the phenomenon, each as it
    presented itself. ashes were now falling on the decks, and became
    hotter and denser as the vessel approached. scorched and blackened
    pumice-stones and bits of rock split by fire were mingled with them.
    the sea suddenly became shallow, and fragments from the mountain
    filled the coast seeming to bar all further progress. he hesitated
    whether to return; but on the master strongly advising it, he cried,
    'fortune favours the brave: make for pomponianus's house.' this was at
    stabiae, and was cut off from the coast near vesuvius by an inlet,
    which had been gradually scooped out by encroachments of the sea. the
    owner was in sight, intending, should the danger (which was visible,
    but not immediate) approach so near as to be urgent, to escape by
    ship. for this purpose he had embarked all his effects and was waiting
    for a change of wind. my uncle, whom the breeze favoured, soon reached
    him, and, embracing him with much affection, tried to console his
    fears. to show his own unconcern he caused himself to be carried to a
    bath; and having washed, sat down to dinner with cheerfulness or (what
    is equally creditable to him) with the appearance of it. meanwhile
    from many parts of the mountain broad flames burst forth; the blaze
    shone back from the sky, and a dark night enhanced the lurid glare. to
    soothe his friend's terror he declared that what they saw was only the
    deserted villages which the inhabitants in their flight had set on
    fire. then he retired to rest, and there can be no doubt that he
    slept, since the sound of his breathing (which a broad chest made deep
    and resonant), was clearly heard by those watching at the door. soon
    the court which led to the chamber was so choked with cinders and
    stones that longer delay would have made escape impossible. he was
    aroused from sleep, and went to pomponianus and the rest who had sat
    up all night. they debated whether to stay indoors or to wander about
    in the open. for on the one hand constant shocks of earthquake made
    the houses rock to and fro, and loosened their foundations; while on
    the other, the open air was rendered dangerous by the fall of pumice-
    stones, though these were light and very porous. on the whole they
    preferred the open air, but what to the rest had been a weighing of
    fears had to him been a balancing of reasons. they tied cushions over
    their heads to guard them from the falling stones. though it was now
    day elsewhere it was here darker than the darkest night, though the
    gloom was broken by torches and other lights. they next walked to the
    sea to try whether it would admit of vessels being launched, but it
    was still a waste of raging waters. he then spread a linen cloth, and,
    reclining on it, asked several times for water, which he drank; soon,
    however, the flames and that sulphurous vapour which preceded them put
    his companions to flight and compelled him to arise. he rose by the
    help of two slaves, but immediately fell down dead. his death no doubt
    arose from suffocation by the dense vapour, as well as from an
    obstruction of his stomach, apart which had been always weak and
    liable to inflammation and other discomforts. when daylight returned,
    _i.e._ after three days, his body was found entire, just as it
    was, covered with the clothes in which he had died; his appearance was
    that of sleep rather than of death."

this interesting letter, which was sent to tacitus for insertion in his
history, gives a fine description of the eruption. another, still more
graphic, is given in a later letter of the same book. [5] a third [6]
informs us of the extraordinary studiousness and economy of time practised
by the philosopher, which enabled him in a life by no means long to
combine a very active business career with an amount of reading and
writing only second to that of varro. pliny's admiration for his uncle's
unwearied diligence makes him delight to dwell on these particulars:

    "after the vulcanalia (the 23d of august) he always began work at dead
    of night, in winter at 1 a.m., never later than 2 a.m., often at
    midnight. he was most sparing of sleep; at times it would catch him
    unawares while studying. after his interview with vespasian was over,
    he went to business, then to study for the rest of the day. after a
    light meal, which like our ancestors he ate by day, he would in
    summer, if he had any leisure, lie in the sun, while some one read to
    him and he made notes or extracts. he never read without making
    extracts; no book, he said, was so bad but that something might be
    gained from it. after sunning himself he would take a cold bath, then
    a little food, then a short nap. then, as if it were a new day, he
    studied till supper. during this meal a book was read, he all the
    while making notes. i remember once, when the reader mispronounced a
    word, that one of our friends compelled him to repeat it. my uncle
    asked him if he had not understood the word. on his replying, yes, my
    uncle said sharply, 'then why did you interrupt him? we have lost more
    than ten lines;' so frugal was he of his time. he rose from supper
    before dark in summer, before 7 p.m. in winter; and this habit was law
    to him. such was his life in town; but in the country his one and only
    interruption from study was the bath. i mean the actual _bathing_; for
    while he was being rubbed he always either dictated, or listened to
    reading. on a journey, having nothing else to do, he gave himself
    wholly to study; at his side was an amanuensis, who in winter wore
    gloves, that his master's work might not be interrupted by the cold.
    even in rome he always travelled in a sedan. i remember his chiding me
    for taking a walk, saying, "you might have saved those hours"--for
    every moment not given to study he thought lost time. by this
    application he contrived to compose that vast array of volumes which
    we possess, besides bequeathing to me 160 rolls of selected notes,
    each roll written on both sides and in the smallest possible hand,
    which practically doubles their number. to call myself studious with
    his example before me is absurd; compared with him, i am an idle
    vagabond."

in the earlier part of this letter, pliny gives a list of his uncle's
works. besides those mentioned in the text, we find a treatise on
eloquence called _studiosus_, and a continuation of the history of
aufidius bassus in thirty books, dedicated to the emperor titus. the
_natural history_, in thirty-seven books, is the sole monument of pliny's
industry that has descended to us. the fortunes of this portentous work
have greatly varied; while in the middle ages it was reverenced as a kind
of encyclopaedia of all secular knowledge, in our own day, except to
antiquarians, it is an unknown book. many who know virgil almost by heart
have never read through its tiresome and conceited preface. yet there is
an immensity of interesting matter discussed in the work. independently of
its vast learning, for it contains, according to its author's statement,
twenty thousand facts, and excerpts or redactions from two thousand books
or treatises, its range of subjects is such as to include something
attractive to every taste. strictly speaking, many topics enter which do
not belong to natural history at all, _e.g._, the account of the use made
of natural substances in the applied sciences and the useful or fine arts;
but as these are decidedly the best-written parts of the work, and full of
chatty, pleasant anecdotes, we should be much worse off if they had been
omitted. the confused arrangement also, which mars its utility as a
compendium of knowledge, may be due in great measure to the indefinite
state of science at the time, to the gaps in its affinities which the
discovery of so many new sciences has helped to fill up, and the
consequent mingling together of branches which are separate and distinct.

it is questionable whether pliny ever had any originality. if he had, it
was stamped out long before he began his book by the weight of his
cumbrous erudition. he cannot compare his materials, nor select them, nor
analyse them, nor make them explain themselves by lucid arrangement. nor
has his review of human knowledge taught him the great truth that science
is progressive, that each age corrects the errors of the past, and
prepares the way for the improvements of the next. seneca, with all his
affected contempt for science, learnt the lesson of it better than pliny.
he has in the first place no fixed canon of truth. one thing does not seem
to him more probable than another. a statement has only to come forward
under the testimony of a respectable ancient, and it is at once put down
as a fact. here, however, we must make a distinction, for fear of
invalidating pliny's authority beyond what is just. it is only in strictly
scientific matters that this credulity and lack of penetration is found.
where he deals with historical, biographical, or agricultural questions,
he is a competent, and for the most part trustworthy, compiler. his work
is a most valuable storehouse for the antiquarian or historian of ancient
literature or art, and generally for the current opinions on nearly every
topic. though genuinely devoted to learning, he has still enough of the
"old adam" of rhetoric about him to complain of the dryness of his
material, and its unsuitableness for ornamental treatment; but this cannot
surprise us, when we remember that even tacitus with infinitely less
reason bewailed the monotony of the events he had taken upon him to
record.

what partly accounts for pliny's uncritical credulity is the
unsatisfactory theory of the universe which he adopts, and with
commendable candour sets before us at the outset. [7] he is a
materialistic pantheist. the world is for him deity, self-created and
eternal, incomprehensible by man, moving ceaselessly without reference to
him. so far there is nothing unscientific, except the hypothesis of self-
creation; but he goes on to imply that the laws of its action, being
incomprehensible, need not be regular, at any rate, as we consider
regularity. the things which militate against our experience may be the
result of other laws, or of chance contingencies of which no account can
be given. hence he never rejects a fact on the ground of its being
marvellous. the most ludicrous and inconceivable monstrosities find an
easy place in his system. he does not attach any superstitious meaning to
them; on the contrary, he ridicules the idea that omens or portents are
sent by the gods, but he has no touchstone by which to test the rare but
possible results of real experience as distinguished from the figments of
the imagination or ordinary travellers' stories. in the zoological part he
gives the reins to his love of the marvellous; all kinds of absurdities
are narrated with the utmost gravity; and his accounts descended through
the mediaeval period as the accredited authority on the subject. in the
literature of prester john will be seen many a reflection from the
writings of pliny; in the fables of the _arabian nights_ many more, with
characteristic additions equally creditable to human weakness or
ingenuity. it is truly lamentable to reflect that while the rational and
on the whole truthful descriptions of aristotle and theophrastus were
extant and accessible, pliny's nonsense should in preference have gained
the ear of mankind.

as a stylist pliny recalls two very different writers, seneca and cato. in
those parts where he speaks as a moralist (and they are extremely
numerous), he strives to reproduce the point of seneca; in those where he
treats of husbandry, which are perhaps the most naturally written in the
work, his stern brevity often recalls the old censor. like seneca, he
considers physical science as food for edification; continually he deserts
his theme to preach a sermon on the folly or ignorance of mankind. and
like cato he is never weary of extolling the wisdom and virtues of the
harsh infancy of the republic, and blaming the degeneracy of its feeble
and luxurious descendants who refuse to till the soil, and add acre to
acre of their overgrown estates.

pliny has a strong vein of satire, and its effect is increased by a
certain sententious quaintness which gives a racy flavour to many
otherwise dull enumerations of facts. but his satire is not of a pleasing
type; it is built too much on despair of his kind; his whole view of the
universe is querulous, and shows a mind unequal to cope with the knowledge
it has acquired.

he was considered the most learned man of his day, and with reason. he at
least knew the value of first-hand acquaintance with the original
authorities, instead of drawing a superficial culture from manuals and
abridgments, or worse still, the empty declamations of the rhetorical
schools. and after all it is his age which must bear the blame of his
failure rather than himself. for while he was not great enough to rise
above his surroundings and investigate, compare, and conclude on a method
planned by himself, he was just the man who would have profited to the
full by being trained in a sound public system of education, and perhaps,
had he lived in the ciceronian period, would have risen to a much higher
place as a permanent contributor to the journal of human knowledge.

among the younger contemporaries of pliny, the most celebrated is m.
fabius quintilianus (35-95 a.d.), [8] a native of calagurris in spain, but
educated in rome, and long established there as a popular and influential
public professor of eloquence. he was intrusted by domitian with the
education of his two grand-nephews, an honour to which he owed his
subsequent elevation to the consulship. his time had been so fully
occupied with lecturing as to allow no leisure for publishing anything
until the closing years of his career. this gave him the great advantage
of being a ripe writer before he challenged the judgment of the world;
and, in truth, quintilian's knowledge and love of his subject are thorough
in the highest degree. his first essay was a treatise on the causes of the
decay of eloquence, [9] and the last (which we still possess) a work in
twelve books on the complete training of an orator. [10] this celebrated
work, to which quintilian devoted the assiduous labour of two whole years,
interrupted only by the lessons given to his royal pupils, represents the
maturest treatment of the subject which we possess. the author was modest
enough to express a strong unwillingness to write it, either fearing to
come forward as an author so late in life, or judging the ground
preoccupied already. however, it was produced at last, and no sooner known
than it at once assumed the high position that has been accorded to it
ever since. the treatment is exhaustive; as much more thorough than the
popular treatises of cicero as it is more attractive than the purely
technical one of cornificius. at the same time it has the defects
inseparable from the unreal age in which its author lived. while minutely
providing for all the future orator's formal requirements, it omits the
material one without which the finished rhetorician is but a tinkling
cymbal, how to _think_ as an orator. no one knew better than quintilian
that this comes from zest in life, not from rules of art. there will be
more stimulus given to one who pants for distinction in the delightful
pages of cicero's _brutus_, than in all that quintilian and such as he
ever wrote or ever will write. but this is not the fault of the man; as a
formal rhetorician of good principle, sound orthodoxy, and love for his
art, quintilian stands high in the list of classical authors.

he begins his orator's training from the cradle. he rightly ascribes the
greatest importance to early impressions, even the very earliest;
illustrating his position by the influence of cornelia who trained her
sons to eloquence from childhood, and other similar cases known to roman
history. a good nurse must be selected; an _eloquent_ one would,
doubtless, be hard to find. the boy who is destined to greatness has now
outgrown the nursery, and the great question arises, is he to be sent to
school? with the romans as with us this difficulty admitted of two
solutions. the lad might be educated at home under tutors, or he might be
sent to learn the world at a public school. those who at the present day
shrink from sending their children to school generally profess to base
their unwillingness on a fear lest the influence of bad example may
corrupt the purity of youth; quintilian on the very same ground, strongly
recommends a parent to send his son to school. by this means, he says,
_his tender years will be saved from the daily contamination which the
scenes of home life afford_. a sad commentary on the state of roman
society and the pernicious effects of slave-labour!

after school, the youth is to attend the lectures of a rhetorician. this
is of course a matter of great importance, and in the second book the
writer handles its various bearings with excellent judgment. having
described the duties of the professor and his pupil, and the various tasks
which will be gone through, he proceeds in the next book to discuss the
different departments of oratory. in this great subject he follows
aristotle, here, as always, going back to the most established
authorities, and adapting them with signal tact to the changed
requirements of a later age and a different nation. the points connected
with this, the central theme of the treatise, carry us through the five
next books. they are the most technical in the work, and not adapted for
general reading. the eighth begins the interesting topic of style, which
is continued in the ninth, where trope, metaphor, amplification, and other
_figurae orationis_ are illustrated at length. throughout these books
there are a large number of quotations, and continual references to the
practice of celebrated masters in the art, besides frequent introduction
of passages from the poets and historians. but it is in the tenth book
that these are concentrated into one focus. to acquire a "firm facility"
(_exis_) of speech it is necessary to have read widely and with
discernment. this leads him to enumerate the greek and roman authors
likely to be most useful to an orator. the criticisms he offers on the
salient qualities of almost all the great classics may seem to us trite
and common-place. they certainly are not remarkable for brilliancy, but
they are just and sober, and have stood the test of ages, and perhaps
their apparent dulness results from their having been always familiar
words. their utility to the student of literature is so considerable, that
we have thought it worth while to append a translation of them to the
present chapter. [11]

the eleventh book chiefly turns on memory, which the romans cultivated
with extreme diligence, and several remarkable instances of which have
been noticed in the course of this work. it was to them a much more vital
excellence than to us, who have adopted the practice of using rough notes
or other assistance to it. delivery, too, is in the eleventh book fully
discussed; and these chapters will be read with interest as showing the
extreme and minute care bestowed by the romans on the smallest details of
action as means of producing effect. generally, their oratory was of a
vehement type. gesture was freely used, and the voice raised to its
fullest pitch. trachalus had such a noisy organ that it drowned the
pleaders in the other courts. even after the decay of freedom the fiery
gestures that had been once its language were not discarded; at the same
time perfect modulation and symmetry were aimed at, so that even in the
most _empresse_ passages decorum was not violated. the systematized
rhetorical training at present general in france, and practised by all who
aspire to arouse the feeling of an assembly, is probably the nearest,
though it may be but a faint, equivalent of the vigorous action of the
roman courts. the twelfth book treats of the moral qualifications
necessary for a great speaker. quintilian insists strongly on these. the
good orator must be a good man. the highest talents are nothing if
distorted by evil thoughts. we thus see that he took a worthy view of his
profession, and would never have degraded it to be the instrument of
tyranny or a means of saturating the ears of the idle with seductive and
complaisant theories of life, by which a spurious popularity is so cheaply
obtained. he was a high-minded man "_quantum licuit_;" _i.e._, as far as a
debased age allowed of high-mindedness. his domestic life was clouded by
sorrow. his first wife died at the early age of nineteen, leaving him two
sons, the younger of whom only lived to the age of seven, and the elder
(for whose instruction he wrote the book, and whose precocious talent and
goodness of disposition he recounts with pardonable pride) only survived
his brother about four years. his death was an irremediable blow, which
the orator bewails in the preface to his sixth book. the passage is
instructive as revealing the taste of the day. the paternal regret clothes
itself in such a profusion of antithesis, trope, and hyperbole, that, did
we not know from other sources the excellence of his heart, we might fancy
he was exercising his talents in the sphere of professional
_advertisement_. before his endowment as professor, which appears to have
brought him about l800 a year, he had occasionally pleaded in the courts;
he appears to have written declamations in various styles, but those now
current under his name are improperly ascribed to him.

among his pupils was the younger pliny, who alludes to him with gratitude
in one of his letters; [12] he was well thought of during his life, and is
frequently mentioned by statius, martial, and juvenal, both as the
cleverest of rhetoricians, and the best and most trusted of teachers; [13]
by juvenal also as a bright instance of good fortune very rare among the
brethren of the craft. [14]

the style of quintilian is modelled on that of cicero, and is intended to
be a return to the usages of the best period. he had a warm love for the
writers of the republican age, above all for cicero, whom he is never
tired of praising; and he preached a crusade against the tinsel ornaments
of the new school whose viciousness, he thought, consisted chiefly in a
corrupt following of seneca. it was necessary, therefore, to impugn the
authority of his brilliant compatriot, and this he appears to have done
with such warmth as to give rise to the opinion that he had a personal
grudge against him. some critics have noticed that quintilian, even when
blaming, often falls into the pointed antithetical style of his time. this
is true. but it was unavoidable; for no man can detach himself from the
mode of speaking common to those with whom he lives. it is sufficient if
he be aware of its worse faults, point out their tendency, and strive to
avoid them. this undoubtedly quintilian did.

among prose writers of less note we may mention licinius mucianus, cluvius
rufus, who both wrote histories; and vipstanus messala, an orator of the
reactionary school, who, like quintilian, sought to restore a purer taste,
and devoted some of his time to historical essays on the events he had
witnessed. m. aper and julius secundus are important as being two of the
speakers introduced into tacitus's dialogue on oratory, the former taking
the part of the modern style, the latter mediating between the two extreme
views, but inclining towards the modern. all these belonged to the reigns
of vespasian and titus, and lived into the first years of domitian.

an important writer for students of ancient applied science is sex. julius
frontinus, whose career extends from about 40 a.d. to the end of the first
century. he was praetor urbanus 70 a.d., and was employed in responsible
military posts in gaul and britain. in the former country he reduced the
powerful tribe of the lingones, in britain, as successor to petilius
cerealis, he distinguished himself against the silures, showing, says
tacitus, qualities as great as it was safe to show at that time. he was
thrice consul, once under domitian, again under nerva (97 a.d.), and
lastly under trajan (100 a.d.), when he had for colleague the emperor
himself. he died 103 a.d. or perhaps in the following year. pliny the
younger knew him well, and has several notices of him in his letters.
throughout his active life he was above all things a man of business:
literature and science, though he was a proficient in both, were made
strictly subservient to the ends of his profession. his character was
cautious but independent, and he is the only contemporary writer we
possess who does not flatter domitian. the work on gromatics, which
originally contained two books, has descended to us only in a few short
excerpts, which treat _de agrorum gualitate, de controversiis, de
limitibus, de controversiis aquarum_. this was written early in the reign
of domitian. another work of the same period was a theoretical treatise on
tactics, alluded to in the more popular work which we possess, and quoted
by vegetius who followed him. in this he examined greek theories of
warfare as well as roman, and apparently with discrimination; for aelian,
in his account of the greek strategical writers, assigns frontinus a high
place. the comprehensive manual called _strategematon_ (_sollertia ducum
facta_) is intended for general reading among those who are interested in
military matters. the books are arranged according to their subjects, but
in the distribution of these there is no definite plan followed. many
interpolations have been inserted, especially in the fourth and last book
which is a kind of appendix, adding general examples of strategic sayings
and doings (_strategematica_) to the specifically-selected instances of
the strategic art which are treated in the first three. its introduction,
as teuffel remarks, is written in a boastful style quite foreign to
frontinus, and the arrangement of anecdotes under various moral headings
reminds us of a rhetorician like valerius maximus, rather than of a man of
affairs. the entire fourth book appears to be an accretion, perhaps as
early as the fourth century. the last treatise by frontinus which we
possess is that _de aquis urbis romae_, or with a slightly different
title, _de aquaeductu_, or _de cura aquarum_, published under trajan soon
after the death of nerva. in an admirable preface he explains that his
invariable custom when intrusted with any work was to make himself
thoroughly acquainted with the subject in all its bearings before
beginning to act; he could thus work with greater promptitude and
despatch, and besides gained a theoretical knowledge which might have
escaped him amid the multitude of practical details. frontinus's account
of the water-supply of rome is complete and valuable: recent explorers
have found it thoroughly trustworthy, and have been aided by it in
reconstructing the topography of the ancient city. [15] the architecture
of rome has been reproached with some justice for bestowing its finest
achievements on buildings destined for amusement, or on mere private
dwellings. but if from the amphitheatres, the villas, the baths, we turn
to the roads, the sewers, and the aqueducts, we shall agree with frontinus
in deeply admiring so grand a combination of the artistic with the useful.
a practical recognition of some of the great sanitary laws seem to have
early prevailed at rome, and might well excite our wonder, if such things
had not been as a rule passed by in silence by historians. recent
discoveries are tending to set the early civilisation of rome on a far
higher level than it has hitherto been able to claim.

the style of frontinus is not so devoid of ornament as might be expected
from one so much occupied in business; but the ornament it has is of the
best kind. he shuns the conceits of the period, and goes back to the
republican authors, of whom (and especially of caesar's _commentaries_)
his language strongly reminds us. we observe that the very simplicity
which quintilian sought in vain from a lifelong rhetorical training is
present unsought in frontinus; a clear proof that it is the occupation of
life and the nature of the man, not the varnish of artistic culture,
however elaborately laid on, that determines the main characteristics of
the writer.

no other prose authors of any name have come down to us from this epoch. a
vast number of persons are flatteringly saluted by statius and martial as
orators, historians, jurists, &c.; but these venal poets had a stock of
complimentary phrases always ready for any one powerful enough to command
them. when we read therefore that tutilius, regulus, flavius ursus,
septimius severus, were great writers, we must accept the statement only
with considerable reductions. victorius marcellus, the friend to whom
quintilian dedicates his treatise, was probably a person of some real
eminence; his juridical knowledge is celebrated by statius. the _silvae_
of statius and the letters of pliny imply that there was a very active and
generally diffused interest in science and letters; but it is easy to be
somebody where no one is great. among grammarians aemilius asper deserves
notice. [16] he seems to have been living while suetonius composed his
biography of grammarians, since he is not included in it. he continued the
studies of cornutus and probus of berytus, and was best known for his
_quaestiones virgilianae_ (of which several fragments still remain), and
his commentaries on terence and sallust. largus licinius, the author of
_ciceromastix_, may perhaps be referred to this time. the reiterated
commendation of cicero occurring in quintilian may have roused the
modernising party into active opposition, and drawn out this _brochure_.
history and philosophy both sunk to an extremely low ebb; no writers on
these subjects worthy of mention are preserved.


appendix.

_quintilian's account of the roman authors._

we subjoin a translation of quintilian's criticism of the chief roman
authors as very important for the student of latin literature, premising,
however, that he judged them solely as regards their utility to one who is
preparing to become an orator. the criticism, although thus special, has a
permanent value, as embracing the best opinion of the time, temperately
stated (inst. or. xi. 85-131):--"the same order will be observed in
treating the roman writers. as homer among the greeks, so _virgil_ among
our own authors will best head the list; he is beyond doubt the second
epic poet of either nation. i will use the words i heard domitius afer use
when i was a boy. when i asked him who he considered came nearest to
homer, he replied, 'virgil is the second, but he is nearer the first than
the third;' and in truth, while rome cannot but yield to that celestial
and deathless genius, yet we can observe more care and diligence in
virgil; for this very reason, perhaps, that he was obliged to labour more.
and so it is that we make up for the lack of occasional splendour by
consistent and equable excellence. all the other epicists will follow at a
respectful distance. _macer_ and _lucretius_ are indeed worth reading, but
are of no value for the phraseology, which is the main body of eloquence.
each is good in his own subject; but the former is humble, the latter
difficult. _varro atacinus_, in those works which have gained him fame,
appears as a translator by no means contemptible, but is not rich enough
to add to the resources of eloquence. _ennius_ let us reverence as we
should groves of holy antiquity, whose grand and venerable trees have more
sanctity than beauty. others are nearer our own day, and more useful for
the matter in hand. _ovid_ in his heroics is as usual wanton, and too fond
of his own talent, but in parts he deserves praise. _cornelius severus_,
though a better versifier than poet, would still claim the second place,
if only he had written all his _sicilian war_ as well as the first book.
but his early death did not allow his genius to be matured. his boyish
works show a great and admirable talent, and a desire for the best style
rare at that time of life. we have lately lost much in _valerius flaccus_.
the inspiration of _salcius bassus_ was vigorous and poetical, but old age
never succeeded in ripening it. _rabirius_ and _pedo_ are worth reading,
if you have time. _lucan_ is ardent, earnest, and full of admirably
expressed sentiments, and, to give my real opinion, should be classed with
orators rather than poets. we have named these because germanicus augustus
(domitian) has been diverted from his favourite pursuit by the care of the
world, and the gods thought it too little for him to be the first of
poets. yet what can be more sublime, learned, matchless in every way, than
the poems in which, giving up empire, he spent the privacy of his youth?
who could sing of wars so well as he who has so successfully waged them?
to whom would the goddesses who watch over studies listen so propitiously?
to whom would minerva, the patroness of his house, more willingly reveal
the mysteries of her art? future ages will recount these things at greater
length. for now this glory is obscured by the splendour of his other
virtues. we, however, who worship at the shrine of letters will crave your
indulgence, caesar, for not passing the subject by in silence, and will at
least bear witness, as virgil says,

  'that ivy wreathes the laurels of your crown.'

"in elegy, too, we challenge the greeks. the tersest and most elegant
author of it is in my opinion _tibullus_. others prefer _propertius_.
_ovid_ is more luxuriant, _gallus_ harsher, than either. satire is all our
own. in this _lucilius_ first gained great renown, and even now has many
admirers so wedded to him, as to prefer him not only to all other
satirists but to all other poets. i disagree with them as much as i
disagree with horace, who thinks lucilius flows in a muddy stream, and
that there is much that one would wish to remove. for there is wonderful
learning in him, freedom of speech with the bitterness that comes
therefrom, and an inexhaustible wit. _horace_ is far terser and purer, and
without a rival in his sketches of character. _persius_ has earned much
true glory by his single book. there are men now living who are renowned,
and others who will be so hereafter. that earlier sort of satire not
written exclusively in verse was founded by _terentius varro_, the most
learned of the romans. he composed a vast number of extremely erudite
treatises, being well versed in the latin tongue as well as in every kind
of antiquarian knowledge; he will, however, contribute much more to
science than to oratory.

"the iambus is not much in vogue among the romans as a separate form of
poetry; it is more often interspersed with other rhythms. its bitterness
is found in _catullus_, _bibaculus_, and _horace_, though in the last the
epode breaks its monotony.

"of lyricists _horace_ is, i may say, the only one worth reading; for he
sometimes rises, and he is always full of sweetness and grace, and most
happily daring in figures and expressions. if any one else be added, it
must be caesius bassus, whom we have lately seen, but there are living
lyricists far greater than he.

"of the ancient tragedians _accius_ and _pacuvius_ are the most renowned
for the gravity of their sentiments, the weight of their words, and the
dignity of their characters. but brilliancy of touch and the last polish
in completing their work seems to have been wanting, not so much to
themselves as to their times. accius is held to be the more powerful
writer; pacuvius (by those who wish to be thought learned) the more
learned. next comes the _thyestes_ of _varius_, which may be compared with
any of the greek plays. the _medea_ of _ovid_ shows what that poet might
have achieved if he had but controlled instead of indulging his
inspiration. of those of my own day _pomponius secundus_ is by far the
greatest. the old critics, indeed, thought him wanting in tragic force,
but they confessed his learning and brilliancy.

"in comedy we halt most lamentably. it is true that varro declares (after
aelius stilo) that the muses, had they been willing to talk latin, would
have used the language of plautus. it is true also that the ancients had a
high respect for caecilius, and that they attributed the plays of terence
to scipio--plays that are of their kind most elegant, and would be even
more pleasing if they had kept within the iambic metre. we can scarcely
reproduce in comedy a faint shadow of our originals, so that i am
compelled to believe the language incapable of that grace, which even in
greek is peculiar to the attic, or at any rate has never been attained in
any other dialect. _afranius_ excels in the national comedy, but i wish he
had not defiled his plots by licentious allusions.

"in history at all events, i would not yield the palm to greece. i should
have no fear in matching _sallust_ against thucydides, nor would herodotus
disdain to be compared with _livy_--livy, the most delightful in
narration, the most candid in judgment, the most eloquent in his speeches
that can be conceived. everything is perfectly adapted both to the
circumstances and personages introduced. the affections, and, above all,
the softer ones, have never (to say the least) been more persuasively
introduced by any writer. thus by a different kind of excellence he has
equalled the immortal rapidity of sallust. _servilius nonianus_ well said
to me: 'they are not like, but they are equal.' i used often to listen to
his recitations; a man of lofty spirit and full of brilliant sentiments,
but less condensed than the majesty of history demands. this condition was
better fulfilled by _aufidius bassus_, who was a little his senior, at any
rate in his books on the german war, in which the author was admirable in
his general treatment, but now and then fell below himself. there still
survives and adorns the literary glory of our age a man worthy of an
immortal record, who will be named some day, but now is only alluded to.
he has many to admire, none to imitate him, as if freedom, though he clips
her wings, had injured him. but even in what he has allowed to remain you
can detect a spirit full lofty, and opinions courageously stated. there
are other good writers; but at present we are tasting, as it were, the
samples, not ransacking the libraries.

"it is the orators who more than any have made latin eloquence a match for
that of greece. for i could boldly pitch cicero against any of their
champions. nor am i ignorant how great a strife i should be stirring up
(especially as it is no part of my plan), were i to compare him with
demosthenes. this is the less necessary, since i think demosthenes should
be read (or rather learnt by heart) above every one else. their
excellences seem to me to be very similar; there is the same plan, order
of division, method of preparation, proof, and all that belongs to
invention. in the oratorical style there is some difference. the one is
closer, the other more fluent; the one draws his conclusion with more
incisiveness, the other with greater breadth; the one always wields a
weapon with a sharp edge, the other frequently a heavy one as well; from
the one nothing can be taken, to the other nothing can be added; the one
shows more care, the other more natural gift. in wit and pathos, both
important points, cicero is clearly first. perhaps the custom of his state
did not allow demosthenes to use the epilogue, but then neither does the
genius of latin oratory allow us to employ ornaments which the athenians
admire. in their letters, of which both have left several, there can be no
comparison; nor in their dialogues, of which demosthenes has not left any.
in one point we must yield: demosthenes came first, and of course had a
great share in making cicero what he was. for to me cicero seems in his
intense zeal for imitating the greeks to have united the force of
demosthenes, the copiousness of plato, and the sweetness of isocrates. nor
has he only acquired by study all that was best in each, but has even
exalted the majority if not the whole of their excellences by the
inexpressible fertility of his glorious talent. for, as pindar says, he
does not collect rain-water, but bursts forth in a living stream; born by
the gift of providence that eloquence might put forth and test all her
powers. for who can teach more earnestly or move more vehemently? to whom
was such sweetness ever given? the very concessions he extorts you think
he begs, and while by his swing he carries the judge right across the
course, the man seems all the while to be following of his own accord.
then in everything he advances there is such strength of assertion that
one is ashamed to disagree; nor does he bring to bear the eagerness of an
advocate, but the moral confidence of a juryman or a witness; and
meanwhile all those graces, which separate individuals with the most
constant care can hardly obtain, flow from him without any premeditation;
and that eloquence which is so delicious to listen to seems to carry on
its surface the most perfect freedom from labour. wherefore his
contemporaries did right to call him 'king of the courts;' and posterity
to give him such renown that cicero stands for the name not of a man but
of eloquence itself. let us then fix our eyes on him; let his be the
example we set before us; let him who loves cicero well know that his own
progress has been great. in _asinius pollio_ there is much invention,
much, according to some, excessive, diligence; but he is so far from the
brilliancy and sweetness of cicero that he might be a generation earlier.
but _messala_ is polished and open, and in a way carries his noble birth
into his style of eloquence, but he lacks vigour. if _julius caesar_ had
only had leisure for the forum, he would be the one we should select as
the rival of cicero. he has such force, point, and vehemence of style,
that it is clear he spoke with the same mind that he warred. yet all is
covered with a wondrous elegance of expression, of which he was peculiarly
studious. there was much talent in _caelius_, and in accusations chiefly
he showed a great urbanity; he was a man worthy of a better mind and a
longer life. i have found those who prefer _calvus_ to any orator; i have
found others who thought with cicero that by too strict criticism of
himself he lost real power; but his style is weighty and noble, guarded,
and often vehement. he was an enthusiastic atticist, and his early death
may be considered a misfortune, if we can believe that a longer life would
have added something to his over concise manner. _servius sulpicius_ has
earned considerable fame by his three speeches. _cassius severus_ will
give many points for imitation if he be read judiciously; if he had added
colour and weight to his other good qualities of style, he would be placed
extremely high. for he has great talent and wonderful power of satire. his
urbanity, too, is great, but he gave himself up to passion rather than
reason. and as his wit is always bitter, so the very bitterness of it
sometimes makes it ludicrous. i need not enumerate the rest of this long
list. of my own contemporaries _domitius afer_ and _julius africanus_ are
far the greatest; the former in art and general style, the latter in
earnestness, and the sorting of words, which sorting, however, is perhaps
excessive, as his arrangements are lengthy and his metaphors immoderate.
there have been lately some great masters in this line. _trachalus_ was
often sublime, and very open in his manner, a man to whom you gave credit
for good motives; but he was much greater heard than read. for he had a
beauty of voice such as i have never known in any other, an articulation
good enough for the stage, and grace of person and every other external
advantage were at their height in him. _vibius crispus_ was neat, elegant,
and pleasing, better for private than public causes. had _julius secundus_
lived longer, his renown as an orator would be first-rate. for he would
have added, as indeed he had already began to add, all the desiderata for
the highest ideal. he would have been more combative, and more attentive
to the subject, even to an occasional neglect of the manner. cut off as he
was, he nevertheless merits a high place; such is his facility of speech,
his charm in explaining what he has to say; his open, gentle, and specious
style, his perfect selection of words, even those which are adopted on the
spur of the moment; his vigorous application of analogies extemporaneously
suggested. my successors in rhetorical criticism will have a rich field
for praising those who are now living. for there are now great talents at
work who do credit to the bar, both finished patrons, worthy rivals of the
ancients, and industrious youths, following them in the path of
excellence.

"there remain the philosophers, few of whom have attained to eloquence.
_cicero_, here as ever, is the rival of plato. _brutus_ stands in this
department much higher than as an orator; he suffices for the weight of
his matter; you can see he feels what he says. _cornelius celsus_,
following the _sextii_, has written a good deal with point and elegance.
_plancus_ among the stoics is useful for his knowledge. among epicureans,
_catius_ though a light is a pleasant writer. i have purposely deferred
_seneca_ until the end, because of the false report current that i condemn
him, and even personally dislike him. this results from my endeavour to
recal to a severer standard a corrupt and effeminate taste. when i began
my crusade, seneca was almost the only writer in the hands of the young.
nor did i try to 'disestablish' him altogether, but only to prevent his
being placed above better men, whom he continually attacked, from a
consciousness that his special talents would never allow him to please in
the way they pleased. and then his pupils loved him better than they
imitated him, and in their imitations fell as much below him as he had
fallen below the ancients. i only wish they could have been equals or
seconds to such a man. but he pleased them solely through his faults; and
it was to reproduce these that they all strove with their utmost efforts,
and then, boasting that they spoke in his style, they greatly injured his
fame. he, indeed, had many and great excellences; an easy and fertile
talent, much study, much knowledge, though in this he was often led astray
by those he employed to 'research' for him. he treated nearly the whole
cycle of knowledge. for he has left speeches, poems, letters, and
dialogues. in philosophy he was not very accurate, but he was a notable
rebuker of vice. many brilliant apophthegms are scattered through his
works; much, too, may be read with a moral purpose. but from the point of
view of eloquence his style is corrupt, and the more pernicious because he
abounds in pleasant faults. one could wish he had used his own talent and
another person's judgment. for had he despised some modes of effect, had
he not striven after others (_partem_), if he had not loved all that was
his own, if he had not broken the weight of his subjects by his short cut-
up sentences, he would be approved by the consent of the learned rather
than by the enthusiasm of boys. for all this, he should be read, but only
by those who are robust and well prepared by a course of stricter models;
and for this object, to exercise their judgment on both sides. for there
is much that is good in him, much to admire; only it requires picking out,
a thing he himself ought to have done. a nature which could always achieve
its object was worthy of having striven after a better object than it
did."




chapter vi

the reigns of vespasian, titus, and domitian (a.d. 69-96).


2. poets.

the poet is usually credited with a genius more independent of external
circumstances than any other of nature's favourites. his inspiration is
more creative, more unearthly, more constraining, more unattainable by
mere effort. he seems to forget the world in his own inner sources of
thought and feeling. as circumstances cannot produce him, so they do not
greatly affect his genius. he is the product of causes as yet unknown to
the student of human progress; he is a boon for which the age that has him
should be grateful, a sort of _aerii mellis caelestia dona_. modern
literature is full of this conception. the poet "does but speak because he
must; he sings but as the linnets sing." never has the sentiment been
expressed with deeper pathos than by shelley's well-known lines:

    "like a poet hidden
      in the light of thought,
    singing hymns unbidden,
      till the world is wrought
  to sympathy with hopes and fears it heeded not."

the idea that the poet can neither be made on the one hand, nor repressed
if he is there, on the other, has become deeply rooted in modern literary
thought. and yet if we look through the epochs that have been most fertile
of great poets, the instances of such self-sufficing hardiness are rare.
in greek poetry we question whether there is one to be found. in latin
poetry there is only lucretius. in modern times, it is true, they are more
numerous, owing to the greater complexity of our social conditions, and
the greater difficulty for a strongly sensuous or deeply spiritual poetic
nature to be in harmony with them all. putting aside these solitary voices
we should say on the whole that poetry, at least in ancient times, was the
tenderest and least hardy of all garden flowers. it needed, so to say, a
special soil, constant care, and shelter from the rude blast. it could
blossom only in the summer of patronage, popular or imperial; the storms
of war and revolution, and the chill frost of despotism, were equally
fatal to its tender life. where its supports were strong its own strength
came out, and that with such luxuriance as to hide the props which lay
beneath; but when once the inspiring consciousness of sympathy and aid was
lost, its fair head drooped, its fragrance was forgotten, and its seeds
were scattered to the waste of air.

if lucan's claim to the name of poet be disputed, what shall we say to the
so-called poets of the flavian age? to valerius flaccus, silius, statius,
and martial? in one sense they are poets certainly; they have a thorough
mastery over the form of their art, over the hackneyed themes of verse.
but in the inspiration that makes the bard, in the grace that should adorn
his mind, in the familiarity with noble thoughts which lends to the
_pharsalia_ an undisputed greatness, they are one and all absolutely
wanting. none of them raise in the reader one thrill of pleasure, none of
them add one single idea to enrich the inheritance of mankind. the works
of pliny and quintilian cannot indeed be ranked among the masterpieces of
literature. but in elegant greatness they are immeasurably superior to the
works of their brethren of the lyre. science can seek a refuge in the
contemplation of the material universe; if it can find no law there, no
justice, no wisdom, no comfort, it at least bows before unchallenged
greatness. rhetoric can solace its aspirations in a noble though hopeless
effort to rekindle an extinct past. poetry, that should point the way to
the ideal, that should bear witness if not to goodness at least to beauty
and to glory, grovels in a base contentment with all that is meanest and
shallowest in the present, and owns no source of inspiration but the
bidding of superior force, or the insulting bribe of a despot's minion
which derides in secret the very flattery it buys.

these poets need not detain us long. there is little to interest us in
them, and they are of little importance in the history of literature. the
first of them is c. valerius flaccus setinus balbus. [1] he was born not,
as his name would indicate, at setia, but at patavium. [2] we gather from
a passage in his poem [3] that he filled the office of _quindecimvir
sacris faciundis_, and from quintilian [4] that he was cut off by an early
death. the date of this event may be fixed with probability to the year 88
a.d. [5] dureau de la malle has disputed this, and thinks it probable that
he lived until the reign of trajan; but this is in itself unlikely, and
inconsistent with the obviously unfinished state of the poem. the legend
of the argonauts which forms its subject was one that had already been
treated by varro atacinus apparently in the form of an imitation or
translation from the same writer, appollonius rhodius, whom valerius also
chose as his model. but whereas varro's poem was little more than a free
translation, that of valerius is an amplification and study from the
original of a more ambitious character. it consists of eight books, of
which the last is incomplete, and in estimating its merits or demerits we
must not forget the immaturity of its author's talent.

the opening dedication to vespasian fixes its composition under his reign.
its profane flattery is in the usual style of the period, but lacks the
brilliancy, the audacity, and the satire of that of lucan. from certain
allusions it is probable that the poem was written soon after the conquest
of jerusalem by titus [6] (a.d. 70). there is considerable learning shown,
but a desire to compress allusions into a small space and to suggest
trains of mythological recollection by passing hints, interfere with the
lucidity of the style. in other respects the diction is classical and
elegant, and both rhythm and language are closely modelled on those of
virgil. licences of versification are rare. the spondaic line, rarely used
by ovid, almost discarded by lucan, but which reappears in statius, is
sparingly employed by valerius. hiatus is still rarer, but the shortening
of final _o_ occurs in verbs and nominatives, such as _juno, virgo_,
whenever it suits the metre. his speeches are rhetorical but not
extravagant, some, _e.g._, that of helle to jason, are very pretty. in
descriptive power he rises to his highest level; some of his subjects are
extremely vivid and might form subjects for a painting. [7] during the
time that he was writing the eruption of vesuvius occurred, and he has
described it with the zeal of a witness. [8]

  "sic ubi prorupti tonuit cum forte vesevi
  hesperiae letalis apex; vixdum ignea montem
  torsit hiems, iamque eoas einis induit urbes."

but in this, as in all the descriptive pieces, however striking and
elaborate, of the period of the decline, are prominently visible the
strained endeavour to be emphatic, and the continual dependence upon book
reminiscence instead of first-hand observation. valerius is no exception
to the rule. nor is the next author who presents himself any better in
this respect, the voluptuary and poetaster c. silius italicus.

this laborious compiler and tasteless versifier was born 25 a.d., or
according to some 24 a.d., and died by his own act seventy-six years
later. he is known to us as a copyist of virgil; to his contemporaries he
was at least as well known as a clever orator and luxurious virtuoso. his
early fondness for virgil's poetry may be presumed from the dedication of
cornutus's treatise on that subject to him, but he soon deserted
literature for public life, in which (68 a.d.) he attained the highest
success by being nominated consul. he had been a personal friend of
vitellius and of nero; but now, satisfied with his achievements, he
settled down on his estates, and composed his poem on the punic wars in
sixteen books. most of the information we possess about him is gathered
from the letter [9] in which pliny narrates his death. we translate the
most striking passages for the reader's benefit.

    "i have just heard that silius has closed his life in his neapolitan
    villa by voluntary abstinence. the cause of his preferring to die was
    ill-health. he suffered from an incurable tumour, the trouble arising
    from which determined him with singular resolution to seek death as a
    relief. his whole life had been unvaryingly fortunate, except that he
    had lost the younger of his two sons. on the other hand, he had lived
    to see his elder and more promising son succeed in life and obtain the
    consulship. he had injured his reputation under nero. it was believed
    he had acted as an informer. but afterwards, while enjoying
    vitellius's friendship, he had conducted himself with courtesy and
    prudence. he had gained much credit by his proconsulship in asia, and
    had since by an honourable leisure wiped out the blot which stained
    the activity of his former years. he ranked among the first men in the
    state, but he neither retained power nor excited envy. he was saluted,
    courted; he received levees often in his bed, always in his chamber,
    which was crowded with visitors, who came attracted by no
    considerations of his fortune. when not occupied with writing, he
    passed his days in learned discourse. his poems evince more diligence
    than talent: he now and then by reciting challenged men's opinions
    upon them. latterly, owing to advancing years, he retired from rome
    and remained in campania, nor did even the accession of a new emperor
    draw him forth. to allow this inactivity was most liberal on the
    emperor's part, to have the courage to accept it was equally
    honourable to silius. he was a virtuoso, and was even blamed for his
    propensities for collecting. he owned several country-houses in the
    same district, and was always so taken with each new house he
    purchased as to neglect the old for it. all of them were well stocked
    with books, statues, and busts of great men. these last he not only
    treasured but revered, above all, that of virgil, whose birthday he
    kept more religiously than his own. he preferred celebrating it at
    naples, where he visited the poet's tomb as if it had been a temple.
    amid such complete tranquillity he passed his seventy-fifth year, not
    exactly weak in body, but delicate."

to this notice of pliny's we might add several by martial; but as these
refer to the same facts, adding beside only fulsome praises of the wealthy
and dignified litterateur, they need not be quoted here. quintilian does
not mention him. but his silence is no token of disrespect; it is merely
an indication that silius was still alive when the great critic wrote.

there is little that calls for remark in his long and tedious work. he is
a poet only by memory. timid and nerveless, he lacks alike the vigorous
beauties of the earlier school, and the vigorous faults of the later. he
pieces together in the straggling mosaic of his poem hemistichs from his
contemporaries, fragments from livy, words, thoughts, epithets, and
rhythms from virgil; and he elaborates the whole with a pre-raphaelite
fidelity to details which completely destroys whatever unity the subject
suggested.

this subject is not in itself a bad one, but the treatment he applies to
it is unreal and insipid in the highest degree. he cannot perceive, for
instance, that the divine interventions which are admissible in the
quarrel of aeneas and turnus are ludicrous when imported into the struggle
between scipio and hannibal. and this inconsistency is the more glaring,
since his extreme historical accuracy (an accuracy so strict as to make
niebuhr declare a knowledge of him indispensable to the student of the
punic wars) gives to his chronicle a prosaic literalness from which
nothing is more alien than the caprices of an imaginary pantheon. who can
help resenting the unreality, when at saguntum jupiter guides an arrow
into hannibal's body, which juno immediately withdraws? [10] or when, at
cannae, aeolus yields to the prayer of juno and blinds the romans by a
whirlwind of dust? [11] these are two out of innumerable similar
instances. amid such incongruities it is no wonder if the heroes
themselves lose all body and consistency, so that scipio turns into a kind
of paladin, and hannibal into a monster of cruelty, whom we should not be
surprised to see devouring children. silius in poetry represents, on a
reduced scale, the same reactionary sentiments that in prose animated
quintilian. so far he is to be commended. but if we must choose a
companion among the flavian poets, let it be statius with all his faults,
rather than this correct, only because completely talentless, compiler.

to him let us now turn. with filial pride he attributes his eminence to
the example and instruction of his father, p. papenius statius, who was,
if we may believe his son, a distinguished and extremely successful poet.
[12] he was born either at naples or at selle; and the doubt hanging over
this point neither the father nor the son had any desire to clear up; for
did not the same ambiguity attach to the birthplace of homer? at any rate
he established himself at naples as a young man, and opened a school for
rhetoric and poetry, engaging in the quinquennial contests himself, and
training his pupils to do the same. it is not certain that he ever settled
at rome; his modest ambition seems to have been content with provincial
celebrity. what the subjects of his prize poetry were we have no means of
ascertaining, but we know that he wrote a short epic on the wars between
vespasian and vitellius and contemplated writing another on the eruption
of vesuvius. his more celebrated son, p. papinius statius the younger, was
born at naples 61 a.d., and before his father's death had carried off the
victory in the neapolitan poetical games by a poem in honour of ceres.
[13] shortly after this he returned to rome, where it is probable he had
been educated as a boy, and in his twenty-first year married a young widow
named claudia (whose former husband seems to have been a singer or
harpist), [14] and their mutual attachment is a pleasing testimony to the
poet's goodness of heart, a quality which the habitual exaggeration of his
manner ineffectually tries to conceal.

domitian had instituted a yearly poetical contest at the quinquatria, in
honour of minerva, held on the alban mount. statius was fortunate enough
on three separate occasions to win the prize, his subject being in each
case the praises of domitian himself. [15] but at the great quinquennial
capitoline contest, in which apparently the subject was the praises of
jupiter, [16] statius was not equally successful. [17] this defeat, which
he bewails in more than one passage, was a disappointment he never quite
overcame, though some critics have inferred from another passage [18] that
on a subsequent occasion he came off victor; but this cannot be proved.
[19]

statius had something of the true poet in him. he had the love of nature
and of those "cheap pleasures" of which hume writes, the pleasures of
flowers, birds, trees, fresh air, a country landscape, a blue sky. these
could not be had at rome for all the favours of the emperor. statius pined
for a simpler life. he wished also to provide for his step-daughter, whom
he dearly loved, and whose engaging beauty while occupied in reciting her
father's poems, or singing them to the music of the harp, he finely
describes. perhaps at naples a husband could be found for her? so to
naples he went, and there in quiet retirement passed the short remainder
of his days, finishing his _opus magnum_ the _thebaid_, and writing the
fragment that remains of his still more ambitious _achilleid_. the year of
his death is not certain, but it may be placed with some probability in 98
a.d.

statius was not merely a brilliant poet. he was a still more brilliant
_improvisator_. often he would pour forth to enthusiastic listeners, as
ovid had done before him,

  "his profuse strains of unpremeditated art."

improvisation had long been cultivated among the greeks. we know from
cicero's oration on behalf of archias that it was no rare accomplishment
among the wits of that nation. and it was not unknown among the romans,
though with them also it was more commonly exercised in greek than in
latin. the technicalities of versification had, since ovid, ceased to
involve any labour. not an aspirant of any ambition but was familiar with
every page of the _gradus ad parnassum_, and could lay it under
contribution at a moment's notice. hence to write fluent verses was no
merit at all; to write epigrammatic verses was worth doing; but to
extemporize a poem of from one to two hundred lines, of which every line
should display a neat turn or a _bon mot_, this was the most deeply
coveted gift of all; and it was the possession of this gift in its most
seductive form that gave statius unquestioned, though not unenvied, pre-
eminence among the _beaux esprits_ of his day. his _silvae_, which are
trifles, but very charming ones, were most of them written within twenty-
four hours after their subjects had been suggested to him. their elegant
polish is undeniable; the worst feature about them is the base
complaisance with which this versatile flatterer wrote to order, without
asking any questions, whatever the eunuchs, pleasure-purveyors, or
freedmen of the emperor desired. they are full of interest also as
throwing light on the manners and fashions of the time and disclosing the
frivolities which in the minds of all the members ol the court had quite
put out of sight the serious objects of life. they contain many notices of
the poet and his friends, and we learn that when they were composed he was
at work on the _thebaid_. he excuses these short _jeux d'esprit_ by
alleging the example of homer's _battle of the frogs and mice_ and
virgil's _culex_. "i hardly know," he says, "of one illustrious poet who
has not prefaced his nobler triumphs of song by some prelude in a lighter
strain." [20] the short prose introductions in which he describes the
poems that compose each book are well worth reading. the first book is
addressed to his friend arruntius stella, who was, if we may believe
statius and martial, himself no mean poet, and in his little _columba_, an
ode addressed to his mistress's dove, rivalled, if he did not surpass, the
famous "sparrow-poem" of catullus. he wrote also several other love poems,
and perhaps essayed a heroic flight in celebrating the sarmatian victories
of domitian. [21]

the _silvae_ were for the most part read or recited in public. we saw in a
former chapter [22] that asinius pollio first introduced these readings.
his object in doing so is uncertain. it may have been to solace himself
for the loss of a political career, or it may have been a device for
ascertaining the value of new works before granting them a place in his
public library. the recitations thus served the purpose of the modern
reviews. they affixed to each new work the critic's verdict, and assigned
to it its place among the list of candidates for fame. no sooner was the
practice introduced than it became popular. horace already complains of
it, and declares that he will not indulge it: [23]

  "non recito cuiquam nisi amicis, idque coactus,
  non ubivis coramve quibuslibet."

he with greater wisdom read his poems to some single friend whose judgment
and candour he could trust--some quinctilius varus, or maecius tarpa--and
he advised his friends the pisos to do the same; but his advice was little
heeded. even during his lifetime the vain thirst for applause tempted many
an author to submit his compositions to the hasty judgment of a
fashionable assembly, and (fond hope!) to promise himself an immortality
proportioned to their compliments. ovid's muse drew her fullest
inspiration from the excitements of the hall, and the poet bitterly
complains in exile that now this stimulus to effort is withdrawn he has
lost the power and even the desire to write. [24] nor was it only poetry
that was thus criticised; grave historians read their works before
publishing them, and it is related of claudius that on hearing the
thunders of applause which were bestowed on the recitations of servilius
nonianus, he entered the building and seated himself uninvited among the
enthusiastic listeners. under nero, the readings, which had hitherto been
a custom, became a law, that is, were upheld by legal no less than social
obligations. the same is true of domitian's reign. this ill-educated
prince wished to feign an interest in literature, the more so, since nero,
whom he imitated, had really been its eager votary. accordingly, he
patronised the readings of the principal poets, and above all, of statius.
this was the golden time of recitations, or _ostentationes_, as they now
with sarcastic justice began to be called, and statius was their chief
hero. as juvenal tells us, he made the whole city glad when he promised a
day. [25] his recitations were often held at the houses of his great
friends, men like abascantius or glabrio, adventurers of yesterday, who
had come to rome with "chalked feet," and now had been raised by caesar to
a height whence they looked with scorn upon the scattered relics of
nobility. it is these men that statius so adroitly flatters; it is to them
that he looks for countenance, for patronage, for more substantial
rewards; and yet so wretched is the recompense even of the highest
popularity, that statius would have to beg his bread if he did not find a
better employer in the actor and manager, paris, who pays him handsomely
for the tragedies that at each successive exhaustion of his exchequer he
is fain to write for the taste of a corrupt mob. [26] but at last statius
began to see the folly of all this. he grew tired of hiring himself out to
amuse, of practising the affectation of a modesty, an inspiration, an
emotion he did not feel, of hearing the false plaudits of rivals who he
knew carped at his verses in his absence and libelled his character, of
running hither and thither over parnassus dragging his poor muse at the
heels of some selfish freedman; he was man enough and poet enough to wish
to write something that would live, and so he left rome to con over his
mythological erudition amid a less exciting environment, and woo the
genius of poesy where its last great master had been laid to rest.

after statius had left rome, the popularity of the recitations gradually
decreased. no poet of equal attractiveness was left to hold them. so the
ennui and disgust, which had perhaps long been smothered, now burst forth.
many people refused to attend altogether. they sent their servants,
parasites, or hired applauders, while they themselves strolled in the
public squares or spent the hours in the bath, and only lounged into the
room at the close of the performance. their indifference at last rejected
all disguise; absence became the rule. even trajan's assiduous attendance
could hardly bring a scanty and listless concourse to the once crowded
halls. pliny the younger, who was a finished reciter, grievously complains
of the incivility shown to deserving poets. instead of the loud cries, the
uneasy motions that had attested the excitement of the hearers, nothing is
heard but yawns or shuffling of the feet; a dead silence prevails. even
pliny's gay spirits and cheerful vanity were not proof against such a
reception. the "little grumblings" (_indignatiunculae_), of which his
letters are full, attest how sorely he felt the decline of a fashion in
which he was so eminently fitted to excel. and if a wealthy noble
patronised by the emperor thus complains, how intolerable must have been
the disappointment to the poet whose bread depended on his verses, the
poet depicted by juvenal, to whom the patron graciously lends a house,
ricketty and barred up, lying at a distance from town, and lays on him the
ruinous expense of carriage for benches and stalls, which after all are
only half-filled!

the frenzy of public readings, then, was over; but statius had learned his
style in their midst, and country retirement could not change it. the
whole of his brilliant epic savours of the lecture room. the verbal
conceits, the florid ornament, the sparkling but quite untranslatable
epigrams which enliven every description and give point to every speech,
need only be noted in passing; for no reader of a single book of the
_thebaid_ can fail to mark them.

this poem, which is admitted by merivale to be faultless in epic
execution, and has been glorified by the admiration of dante, occupied the
author twelve years in the composing, [27] probably from 80 to 92 a.d. its
elaborate finish bears testimony to the labour expended on it. had statius
been content with trifles such as are sketched in the _silvae_ he might
have been to this day a favourite and widely-read poet. as it is, the
minute beauties of his epic lie buried in such a wilderness of
unattractive learning and second-hand mythological reminiscence, that few
care to seek them out. his mastery over the epic machinery is complete;
but he fails not only in the ardour of the bard, but in the vigour of the
mere narrator. his action drags heavily through the first ten books, and
then is summarily finished in the last two, the accession of creon after
oedipus's exile, his prohibition to bury polynices, the interference of
theseus, and the death of creon being all dismissed in fifteen hundred
lines.

the two most striking features in the poem are the descriptions of battles
and the similes. the former are greatly superior to those of lucan or
silius. they have not the hideous combination of horrors of the one, nor
the shadowy unreality of the other. though hatched in the closet and not
on the battle-field, a defect they share with all poets from virgil
downwards, they have sufficient verisimilitude to interest, and not
sufficient reality to shock us. the similes merit still higher praise. the
genius of latin poetry was fast tending towards the epigram, and these
similes are strictly _epigrammatic_. the artificial brevity which suggests
many different lines of reminiscence at the same time is exhibited with
marked success. as the simile was so assiduously cultivated by the latin
epicists and forms a distinctive feature of their style, we shall give in
the appendix to this chapter a comparative table of the more important
similes of the three chief epic poets. at present we shall quote only two
from the _thebaid_, both admirable in their way, and each exemplifying one
of statius's prominent faults or virtues. the first compares an army
following its general across a river to a herd of cattle following the
leading bull: [28]

  "ac velut ignotum si quando armenta per amnem
  pastor agit, stat triste pecus, procul altera tellus [29]
  omnibus, et _late medius timor_: ast ubi ductor
  taurus init fecitque vadum, tune mollior unda,
  tunc faciles saltus, visaeque accedere ripae."

this is elegant in style but full of ambiguities, if not experiments, in
language. the words in italics are an exaggerated imitation of a mode of
expression to which virgil is prone, _i.e._, a psychological indication of
an effect made to stand for a description of the thing. then as to the
three forced expressions of the last two lines--to say nothing of _fecit
vadum_, which may be a pastoral term, as we say _made the ford_, _i.e._
struck it--we have the epithet _mollior_, which, here again in caricature
of virgil, mixes feeling with description, used for _facilior_ in the
sense of "kinder," "more obliging" (for he can hardly mean that it feels
_softer_); _faciles saltus_, either the "leap across seems easier," or
perhaps "the woods on the other side look less frowning;" while to add to
the hyperbole, "the bank appears to come near and meet them." three subtle
combinations are thus expended where virgil would have used one simple
one.

the next simile exemplifies the use of hyperbole at its happiest, an
ornament, by the way, to which statius is specially prone. it is a very
short one. [30] it compares an infant to the babe apollo crawling on the
shore of delos:

          "talis per litora reptans
  improbus ortygiae latus inclinabat apollo."

this is delightful. the mischievous little god crawls near the edge of the
island, and by his divine weight nearly overturns it! we should observe
the gross materialism of idea which underlies this pretty picture. not one
of the roman poets is free from this taint. to take a well-known instance
from virgil; when aeneas gets into charon's boat

          "gemuit sub pondere cymba
  sutilis et multam accepit rimosa paludem." [31]

the effect of the "ingens aeneas" bursting charon's crazy skiff is
decidedly grotesque. lucan has not failed to seize and exaggerate this
peculiarity. to repeat the example we have already noticed in the first
book, [32] when asking nero which part of heaven he is selecting for his
abode, he prays him not to choose one far removed from the centre, lest
his vast weight should disturb the balance of the universe!

  "aetheris immensi partem si presseris unam
  sentiet axis onus."

statius, as we have seen, adds the one element that was wanting, namely
the abstraction of the heroic altogether; nevertheless, in small effects
of this kind, he must be pronounced superior to both virgil and lucan.

the _achilleis_ is a mere fragment, no doubt left as such owing to the
author's early death. the design, of which it was the first instalment,
was even more ambitious than that of the _thebaid_. it aimed at nothing
less than an exhaustive treatment of all the legends of which achilles was
the hero, excepting those which form the subject of the _iliad_. its style
shows a slight advance on that of the earlier poem; it is equally long-
winded, but less bombastic, and consequently somewhat more natural. in one
or two passages statius [33] promises domitian an epic celebrating his
deeds, but probably he never had any serious intention of fulfilling his
word. statius had a high opinion of his own merits, especially when he
compared himself with the poet fraternity of his day; but his careful
study of homer and virgil had shown him that there was a domain into which
he could not enter, and so even while vaunting his claims to immortality,
he is careful not to aspire to be ranked with the poet of the _aeneid_:
[34]

        "nec tu divinam aeneida tenta:
  sed longe sequere et vestigia semper adora."

valerius martialis was born at bilbilis, in hispania tarraconensis (march
1, 43 a.d.), and retained through life an affectionate admiration for the
place of his birth, which he celebrates in numerous poems. [35] at twenty-
two [36] years of age he came to rome, nero being then on the throne. he
does not appear to have been known to that emperor, but rose into great
favour with titus, which was continued under domitian, who conferred on
him the _jus trium liberorum_ [37] and the tribunate, together with the
rank of a roman knight, [38] and a pension from the imperial treasury,
[39] probably attached to the position of court poet. it is difficult to
ascertain the truth as to his circumstances. the facts above mentioned, as
well as his possession of a house in the city and a villa at nomentum,
[40] would point to an easy competence; on the other hand the poet's
continual complaints of poverty [41] prove that he was either less wealthy
than his titles suggest, or else that he was hard to satisfy. on the
accession of trajan he seems to have left rome for spain, it is said
because the emperor refused to recognise his genius; but as he had been a
prominent author for upwards of thirty years, it is likely that his
character, not his talent, was what trajan looked coldly on. a poet who
had prostituted his pen in a way unexampled even among the needy and
immoral pickers-up of chance crumbs that crowded the avenues of the
palace, could hardly be acceptable to a prince of manly character. at the
same time there is this excuse for martial, that he did not belong to the
old families of rome. he and such as he owed everything to the emperor's
bounty, and if the emperor desired flattery in return, it cost them little
pains and still less loss of self-respect to give it. politics had become
entirely a system of palace intrigue. only when the army intervened was
any general interest awakened. the supremacy of the emperor's person was
the one great fact, rapidly becoming a great inherited idea, which formed
the point of union among the diverse non-political classes, and gave the
poets their chief theme of inspiration. it mattered not to them whether
their lord was good or bad. it is well-known that the people liked
domitian, and it was only by the firmness of the senate that he was
prevented from being formally proclaimed as a god. martial does not
pretend to be above the level of conduct which he saw practised by emperor
and people alike. without strength of character, without independence of
thought, both of which indeed were almost extinct at this epoch, his one
object was to ingratiate himself with those who could fill his purse.
hence the indifference he shows to the vices of nero. juvenal, tacitus,
and pliny use a very different language. but then they represented the
old-fashioned ideas of rome. martial, indeed, alludes to nero as a well-
known type of crime: [42]

         "quid nerone peius?
  quid thermis melius neronianis?"

but he has no real passion. the only thing he really hates him for is his
having slain lucan. [43]

martial, then, is much on a level with the society in which he finds
himself; the society, that is, of those very freedmen, favourites, actors,
dancers, and needy bards, that juvenal has made the objects of his satire.
and therefore we cannot expect him to rise into lofty enthusiasm or pure
views of conduct. his poems are a most valuable adjunct to those of
juvenal; for perhaps, if we did not possess martial, we might fancy that
the former's sardonic bitterness had over-coloured his picture. as it is,
these two friends illustrate and confirm each other's statements.

little as his conduct agrees with the respectability of a married man,
martial was married twice. his first wife was cleopatra, [44] of whose
morose temper he complains, [45] and from whom he was divorced [46] soon
after obtaining the _jus trium liberorum_. his second was marcella, whom
he married after his return to spain. [47] of her he speaks with respect
and even admiration. [48] it is possible that his town house and country
estate were part of his first wife's dowry, so that on his divorce they
reverted to her family; this would account for the otherwise inexplicable
poverty in which he so often declares himself to be plunged. while at rome
he had many patrons. besides domitian, he numbered silius italicus, pliny,
stella the friend of statius, regulus the famous pleader, parthenius,
crispinus, and glabrio, among his influential friends. it is curious that
he never mentions statius. the most probable reason for his silence is the
old one, given by hesiod, but not yet obsolete:

  _kai kerameus keramei koteei kai aoidos aoido._

he and statius were indisputably the chief poets of the day. one or other
must hold the first place. we have no means of knowing how this quarrel,
if quarrel it was, arose. among martial's other friends were quintilian,
valerius flaccus, and juvenal. his intimacy with these men, two of whom at
least were eminently respectable, lends some support to his own statement,
advanced to palliate the impurity of his verses:

  "lasciva est nobis pagina: vita proba est."

the year of his death is not certain. but it must have occurred
soon after 100 a.d. pliny in his grand way gives an obituary notice of him
in one of his letters, [49] which, interesting as all his letters are, we
cannot do better than translate:

    "i hear with regret that valerius martial is dead. he was a man of
    talent, acuteness, and spirit, with plenty of wit and gall, and as
    sincere as he was witty. i gave him a parting present when he left
    rome, which was due both to our friendship and to some verses which he
    wrote in my praise. it was an ancestral custom of ours to enrich with
    honours or money those who had written the praises of individuals or
    cities, but among other noble and seemly customs this has now become
    obsolete. i suppose since we have ceased to do things worthy of
    laudation, we think it in bad taste to receive it."

pliny then quotes the verses, [50] and proceeds--

    "was i not justified in parting on the most friendly terms with one
    who wrote so prettily of me, and am i not justified now in mourning
    his loss as that of an intimate friend? what he could he gave me; if
    he had had more he would have gladly given it. and yet what gift can
    be greater than glory, praise, and immortality? it is possible,
    indeed, as i think i hear you saying, that his poems may not last for
    ever. nevertheless, he wrote them in the belief that they would."

martial is the most finished master of the epigram, as we understand it.
epigram is with him condensed satire. the harmless plays on words, sudden
surprises, and neat turns of expression, which had satisfied the greek and
earlier latin epigrammatists, were by no means stimulating enough for the
_blase_ taste of martial's day. the age cried for _point_, and with point
martial supplies it to the full extent of its demand. his pungency is
sometimes wonderful; the whole flavour of many a sparkling little poem is
pressed into one envenomed word, like the scorpion's tail whose last joint
is a sting. the marvel is that with that biting pen of his the poet could
find so many warm friends. but the truth is, he was far more than a mere
sharp-shooter of wit. he had a genuine love of good fellowship, a warm if
not a constant heart, and that happy power of graceful panegyric which was
so specially roman a gift. juvenal, indeed, complains that the greeks were
hopelessly above his countryman in the art of praise. but this is not an
opinion in which we can agree. their fulsome adulation may indeed have
been more acceptable to the vulgar objects of it than that of the roman
panegyrist, who, even while flattering, could not shake off the fetters of
the great dialect in which he wrote; but the efforts in this department by
cicero, ovid, horace, pliny, and martial, mast be allowed to be master-
achievements to which it would be hard to find an equal in the literature
of any other nation.

martial is one of the most difficult of roman authors. scarce once or
twice does he relax his style sufficiently to let the reader _read_
instead of spelling through his poems. when he does this he is elegant and
pleasing. the epicedion on a little girl who died at the age of six, is a
lovely gem that may almost bear comparison with catullus; but then it is
spoilt by the misplaced wit of the last few lines. [51] few indeed are the
poems of martial that are natural throughout. his constant effort to be
terse, to condense description into allusion, and allusion into
indication, and to indicate as many allusions as possible by a single
word, compels the reader to weigh each expression with scrupulous care
lest he may lose some of the points with which every line is weighted; and
yet even martial is less perfect in this respect than juvenal. but then
the shortness of his pieces takes away that relief which a longer satire
must have, not only for its author's sake, but for purposes of artistic
success. he must have read juvenal with care, and sometimes seems to give
a _decoction_ of his satires. [52] it is probable that we do not possess
all martial's poems. it is also possible that many of those we possess
under his name are not by him. the list embraces one book of _spectacula_,
celebrating the shows in which emperor and people took such delight;
twelve of _epigrams_, edited separately, and partially revised for each
edition; [53] two of _xenia_ and _apophoreta_, written before the tenth
book of epigrams, and devoted to the flattery of domitian. the obscenities
which defile almost every book make it impossible to read martial with any
pleasure, but those who desire to make his acquaintance will find book iv.
by far the least objectionable in this respect, as well as otherwise more
interesting.

at this time rome teemed with poets; as pliny in one of his letters tells
us, people reckoned the year by the abundance of its poetic harvest.
turnus seems to have been a satirist of some note; [54] among others he
satirised the poisoner locusta. scaevius memor was a tragedian; [55] a
_hecuba_, a _troades_, and perhaps a _hercules_, are ascribed to him.
verginius rufus wrote erotic poems, and an epigram of his is quoted by
pliny. [56] vestricius spurinna was a lyricist, and had been consul under
domitian; a fine account of him is given by pliny. [57] the only roman
poetess of whom we possess any fragment, belongs to this epoch, the
highborn lady sulpicia. she is celebrated by martial for her chaste love-
elegies, [58] and for fidelity to her husband calenus. we suspect,
however, that martial is a little satiric here. for the epithets bestowed
by other writers on sulpicia imply warmth, not to say wantonness of tone,
though her muse seems to have been constant to its legitimate flame. we
possess about seventy hexameters bearing the title _sulpiciae satira_,
supposed to have been written after the banishment of all philosophers by
domitian (94 a.d.). it is a dialogue between the poetess and her muse: she
excuses herself for essaying so slight a subject in epic metre, and
implies that she is more at home in lighter rhythms. this may be believed
when we find that she makes the _i_ of iambus long! however, the poem is
corrupt, and the readings in many parts uncertain. teuffel regards it as a
forgery of the fifteenth century, following boot's opinion. it is full of
harsh constructions [59] and misplaced epithets, but on the other hand
contains some pretty lines. if it be genuine, its boldness is remarkable.
great numbers of other poets appear in the pages of martial, statius, and
pliny, but they need not be named. the fact that verse-writing was an
innocuous way of spending one's leisure doubtless drove many to it.
codrus, or cordus, [60] was the author of an ambitious epic, the
_theseid_, composed on the scale, but without the wit, of the _thebaid_.
the stage, too, engaged many writers. tragedy and comedy [61] were again
reviving, though their patrons seem to have preferred recitation to
acting; mimes still flourished, though they had taken the form of
pantomime. we hear of celebrated actors of them in juvenal, as paris,
latinus, and thymele.


appendix.

_on the similes of virgil, lucan, and statius._

the roman epicists bestowed great elaboration on their similes, and as a
rule imitated them from a certain limited number of greek originals. in
virgil but a few are original, _i.e._, taken from things he had himself
witnessed, or feelings he had known. lucan is less imitative in form, and
he first used with any frequency the simile founded on a recollection of
some well-known passage of greek literature or conception of greek art. in
this statius follows him; the simile of the infant apollo noticed in this
chapter is a good instance.

we give a few examples of the treatment of a similar subject by the three
poets. we first take the simile of a storm, _described_ by virgil in the
first aeneid, and _alluded_ to by the other two poets (lucan i. 493):

                 "qualis cum turbidus auster
  repulit e libycis immensum syrtibus aequor
  fractaque veliferi sonuerunt pondera mali,
  desilit in fluctus deserta puppe magister
  navitaque, et nondum sparsa compage carinae
  _naufragium sibi quisque facit_."

here we have no great elaboration, but a good point at the finish. statius
(theb. i. 370) is more subtle but more commonplace:

  "ac velut hiberno deprensus navita ponto,
  cui neque temo piger, nec amico sidere monstrat
  luna vias, medio caeli pelagique tumultu
  stat rationis inops; iam iamque aut saxa maliguis
  expectat submersa vadis, aut vertice acuto
  spumantes scopulos erectae incurrere prorae."

the next simile is that of a shepherd robbing a nest of wild bees. it
occurs in virgil and statius. virgil's description is (aen. xii. 587)--

  "inclusas ut cum latebroso in pumice pastor
  vestigavit apes, fumoque implevit amaro;
  illae intus trepidae rerum per cerea castra
  discurrunt, magnisque acuunt stridoribus iras;
  volvitur ater odor tectis; tum murmure caeco
  intus saxe sonant: vaeuas it fumus ad auras."

that of statius (th. x. 574) presents some characteristic refinements on
its original:

  "sic ubi pumiceo pastor rapturas ab antro
  armatas erexit apes, fremit aspera nubes:
  inque vicem sese stridere hortantur et omnes
  hostis in ora volant; mox deficientibus alis
  amplexae flavamque domum captivaque plangunt
  mella, laboratasque _premunt ad pectora ceras_."

the smoke which is the agent of destruction is _described_ by virgil:
obscurely _hinted at_ in statius by the single epithet "deficientibus."

the next example is the description of a landslip by the same two. virg.
aen. xii. 682.

  "ac velati montis saxum de vertice praeceps
  quum ruit avolsum vento, seu turbidus imber
  proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,
  fertur in abruptum vasto mons improbus actu,
  exsultatque solo, silvas armenta virosque
  involvens secum."

the copy is found stat. theb. vii. 744:

  "sic ubi _nubiferum_ montis latus aut nova ventis
  solvit hiems aut _victa situ_ non pertulit aetas;
  desilit horrendus campo timor, arma virosque
  _limite, non uno_ longaevaque robora secum
  praecipitans, tandemque _exhaustus_ turbine _fesso_
  aut vallum cavat, aut medios intercipit amnes."

the additions are here either exaggerations, trivialities, or ingenious
adaptations of other passages of virgil.

the next is a thunderstorm from virgil and lucan, (aen. xii. 451):

  "qualis ubi ad terras abrupto sidere nimbus
  it mare per medium; miseris, heu, praescia longe
  horrescunt corda agricolis; dabit ille ruinas
  arboribus stragemque satis, ruet omnia late;
  antevolant somtumque ferunt ad litora venti."

the simile of lucan, which describes one disastrous flash rather than a
storm (phars. i. 150) refers to caesar:

  "qualiter expressum ventis per nubila fulmen
  aetheris impulsi sonitu _mundi_ que fragore.
  emicuit, rupitque diem, populosque paventes
  terruit, obliqua praestringens lumina flamma:
  in _sua templa_ furit, nullaque exire vetante
  materia, magnamque cadens, magnamque revertens
  dat stragem late, sparsosque recolligitignes."

no comparison is more common in latin poetry than that of a warrior to a
bull. all the three poets have introduced this, some of them several
times. the instances we select will be virg. aen. xii. 714:

  "ac velut ingenti sila summove taburno
  cum duo conversis inimica in proelia tauri
  frontibus incurrunt, pavidi cessere magistri,
  stat pecus omne metu mutum mussantque iuvencae,
  quis nemori imperitet, quem tota armenta sequantur."

lucan's simile is borrowed largely from the _georgics_. it is, however, a
fine one (phars. ii. 601):

  "pulsus ut armentis primo cerramine taurus
  silvarum secreta petit, vacuosque per agros
  exul in adversis explorat cornua truncis;
  nec redit in pastus nisi quum cervice recepta
  excussi placuere tori; mox reddita victor
  _quoslibet_ in saltus comitantibus agmina tauris
  _invito pastore trahit_."

that of statius is in a similar strain (theb. xi. 251):

  "sic ubi regnator post exulis otia tauri
  mugitum hostilem summa tulit aure iuvencus,
  agnovitque minas, magna stat fervidus ira
  ante gregem, spumisque animos ardentibus effert,
  nunc pede torvus humum nunc cornibus aera lindens,
  _horret ager, trepidaeque expectant proelia valles_."

how immeasurably does virgil's description in its unambitious truth exceed
these two fine but bombastic imitations!

these examples will suffice to show that each poet kept his predecessors
in his eye, and tried to vie with them in drawing a similar picture. but
the similes are not always taken from the common-place book. virgil, who
reserves nearly all his similes for the last six books, occasionally
strikes an original key. such are (or appear) the similes of the sedition
quelled by an orator (i. 148), the top (vii. 378), the labyrinth (v, 588),
the housewife (viii. 407), and the fall of the pier at baiae (ix. 707);
perhaps also of the swallow (xii. 473); mythological similes are common in
him, but not so much, so as in lucan and statius. we have those of the
amazons (xi. 659), of mars' shield in thrace (xii. 331), condensed by
statius (_theb._ vi. 665), of orestes (iv. 471), copied by lucan (_ph._
vii. 777).

the lion, as may be supposed, furnishes many. we subjoin a further list
which may be useful to the reader.

_the lion_--aen. xii. 4; x. 722; ix. 548(?). phars. i. 206. theb. ii. 675;
iv. 494; v. 598; vii. 670; viii. 124; ix. 739, and perhaps v. 231.

_the serpent, dragon, &c._--aen. xi, 751; v. 273. theb. v. 599; xi. 310.

_mythological_--phars. ii. 715; iv. 549; vii. 144. theb. ii. 81; iv. 140;
xii. 224, 270.

_the sea_--aen. xi. 624; vii. 586 (?). theb. i. 370; iii. 255; vi. 777;
vii. 864.

_the winds_--aen. x. 856. phars. i. 498. theb. i. 194; iii. 432; v. 704.

_the boar_--aen. x. 707. theb. viii. 533.

_trees_--aen. ix. 675. phars. i. 136. theb. viii. 545.

_birds_--aen. v. 213; xii. 473; xi. 721; vii. 699. theb. ix. 858; xii. 15.

we may note detached similes like that of the light reflected in water,
aen. viii. 15, imitated in theb. vi. 578; that of the horse from homer,
aen. xi. 491, which statius has not dared to imitate; and others not
referable to any of the above groups may easily be found. it is clear that
virgil and statius attached more importance to this ornament than lucan.
their verbal elaboration was greater, and thus they both excel him. a
careful study of all the similes in latin poetry would bring to light some
interesting facts of literary criticism. that descriptive power in which
all the romans excelled is nowhere more striking than in these short and
pleasing cameos.




chapter vii.

the reigns of nerva and trajan (96-117 a.d.).


the death of domitian was the end of tyranny in rome. under nerva a new
regime was inaugurated. liberty of speech and action was allowed, and
authors were not slow to profit by it. the forced repression of so many
years had matured, not quenched, the talent of the greatest writers.
virtuous men had pondered in gloomy silence over the wickedness of the
time, and they now gave to the world the condensed result of their bitter
reflections. amid the numerous talents of the period three have sent down
to us a large portion of their works. these three are all writers of the
highest mark, and two of them of commanding genius. for grace, urbanity,
and polish, pliny yields only to cicero; for realistic intensity directed
to a satiric purpose, juvenal yields to no writer whatever; for piercing
insight into the human heart and an imagination which casts its characters
as in a white-hot furnace, tacitus well deserves the name of rome's
greatest historian. chronologically speaking, pliny is posterior to the
other two. but he is so good a type of this comparatively happy age that
he may well come before us first. the other two, occupied with past
regrets, reflect in their tone of mind an earlier time.

c. plinius caecilius secundus, the nephew of pliny the elder, was born at
novocomum [1] 62 a.d. when he was eight years old his father died, and two
years after his uncle adopted him. in the interim he was assigned to the
care of his guardian, that virginius rufus of whom tacitus deigned to be
the panegyrist. he was brought early to rome, and placed under quintilian
and other celebrated teachers, among whom was nicetes of smyrna, one of
the foremost rhetoricians of the day. he served his first campaign in
syria, but seems to have given his time to philosophy more than
soldiering. he was even more emphatically a man of peace than cicero, and
it is not easy to fancy him wielding the sword, though we can well picture
him to ourselves resplendent in full dress uniform, well satisfied with
his appearance, and trying his best to assume the martial air. while in
asia he spent much time with the old philosopher euphrates, of whose daily
life he has given a pleasing description in the tenth letter of his first
book.

on his return he studied for the bar, and pleaded with success. he passed
through the several offices of state, and prided himself not a little on
the fact that he attained the consulate and pontificate at an earlier age
than cicero. somewhat later he was elected to the college of augurs, an
honour which prompts him to remind the world that cicero had been augur
too! in 98 a.d., when trajan had been two years emperor, pliny was raised
for the second time to the consulate, and was admitted to some share of
his sovereign's confidence. the points, it is true, on which he was
consulted were not of the most important, but he was extremely pleased,
and has recorded his pleasure in more than one of his charming letters. in
103 he was sent to fill the office of proconsul in pontus and bithynia;
and while there, he kept up the interesting correspondence with trajan, to
which the tenth book of his letters is devoted.

though eloquence was not what it had been, it still remained the highest
career that an ambitious man could adopt. even under the tyrants it had
served as the keenest weapon of attack, the surest buckler of defence. the
_public accusation_, which had once been the stepping-stone to fame, had
changed its name, and become _delation_. and he who hoped to parry its
blows must needs have been able to defend himself by the same means. pliny
was ahead of all his rivals in both departments of eloquence. he was the
most telling pleader before the centumviral tribunal, and he was the
boldest orator in the revived debates of the senate. his best forensic
speech, his _de corona_, as he loved to style it, was that on behalf of
accia variola, a lady unjustly disinherited by her father, whom pliny's
eloquence reinstated in her rights. in the senate pliny rose to even
higher efforts. he rejoiced to plead the cause of injured provinces
against the extortion of rapacious governors, who (as juvenal tells us)
pillaged the already exhausted wealth of their helpless victims. on more
than one occasion pliny's boldness was crowned with success. caecilius
classicus, who had ground down the baeticenses, was so powerfully
impeached by him that, to avoid conviction, he sought a voluntary death,
and what was better, the confiscated property was returned to its owners.
the still worse criminal, marius priscus, who in exile "enjoyed the anger
of the gods," [2] was compelled by pliny and tacitus to disgorge no small
portion of his plunder. when carried away by his subject pliny spoke with
such vehemence as to endanger his delicate lungs, and he tells us with no
small complacency that the emperor sent him a special message "to be
careful of his health." but his greatest triumph was the accusation of
publicius certus, a senator, and expectant of the consulship. the fathers,
long used to servitude, could not understand the freedom with which pliny
attacked one of their own body, and at first they tried to chill him into
silence. but he was not to be daunted. he compelled them to listen, and at
last so roused them by his fervour that he gained his point. it is true
that he risked neither life nor fortune by his boldness; but none the less
does he deserve honour for having recalled the senate to a tardy sense of
its position and responsibilities.

roman eloquence was now split into two schools or factions, one of which
favoured the ancient style, the other the modern. pliny was the champion
of reaction: tacitus the chief representative of the modern tendency.
unfortunately, pliny's best oratory has perished, but we can hardly doubt
that its brilliant wit and courtly finish would have impressed us less
than they did the ears of those who heard him. one specimen only of his
oratorical talent remains, the panegyric addressed to trajan. this was
admitted to be in his happiest vein, and it is replete with point and
elegance. the impression given on a first reading is, that it is full also
of flattery. this, however, is not in reality the case. allowing for a
certain conventionality of tone, there is no flattery in it; that is,
there is nothing that goes beyond truth. but pliny has the unhappy talent
of speaking truth in the accents of falsehood. like seneca, he strikes us
in this speech as _too clever_ for his audience. still, with all its
faults, his oratory must have made an epoch, and helped to arrest the
decline for at least some years.  it is on his letters that pliny's fame
now rests, and both in tone and style they are a monument that does him
honour. they show him to have been a gentleman and a man of feeling, as
well as a wit and courtier. they were deliberately written with a view to
publication, and thus can never have the unique and surpassing interest
that belongs to those of cicero. but they throw so much light on the
contemporary history, society, and literature, that no student of the age
can afford to neglect them. they are arranged neither according to time
nor subject, but on an aesthetic plan of their author's, after the fashion
of a literary nosegay. as extracts from several have already been given,
we need not enlarge on them here. their language is extremely pure, and
almost entirely free from that poetical colouring which is so conspicuous
in contemporary and subsequent prose-writing.

the tenth book possesses a special interest, as containing the
correspondence between pliny while governor of bithynia and the emperor
trajan, to whose judgment almost every question that arose, however
insignificant, was referred. [3] as he says in his frank way: "solemne est
mihi, domine, omnia de quibus dubito ad te referre." [4] the letter which
opens with these words is the celebrated one on the subject of the
christians. perhaps it may not be out of place to translate it, as a
highly significant witness of the relations between the emperors and their
confidential servants. it runs thus:--

    "i had never attended at the trial of a christian; hence i knew not
    what were the usual questions asked them, or what the punishments
    inflicted. i doubted also whether to make a distinction of ages, or to
    treat young and old alike; whether to allow space for recantation, or
    to refuse all pardon whatever to one who had been a christian;
    whether, finally, to make the name penal, though no crime should be
    proved, or to reserve the penalty for the combination of both.
    meanwhile, when any were reported to me as christians, i followed this
    plan. i asked them whether they were christians. if they said yes, i
    repeated the question twice, adding threats of punishment; if they
    persisted, i ordered punishment to be inflicted. for i felt sure that
    whatever it was they confessed, their inflexible obstinacy well
    deserved to be chastised. there were even some roman citizens who
    showed this strange persistence; those i determined to send to rome.
    as often happens in cases of interference, charges were now lodged
    more generally than before, and several forms of guilt came before me.
    an anonymous letter was sent, containing the names of many persons,
    who, however, denied that they were or had been christians. as they
    invoked the gods and worshipped with wine and frankincense before your
    image, at the same time cursing christ, i released them the more
    readily, as those who are really christians cannot be got to do any of
    these things. others, who were named to me, admitted that they were
    christians, but immediately afterwards denied it; some said they had
    been so three years ago, others at still more distant dates, one or
    two as long ago as twenty years. all these worshipped your image and
    those of the gods, and abjured christ. but they declared that all
    their guilt or error had amounted to was this: they met on certain
    mornings before daybreak, and sang one after another a hymn to christ
    as god, at the same time binding themselves by an oath not to commit
    any crime, but to abstain from theft, robbery, adultery, perjury, or
    repudiation of trust; after this was done, the meeting broke up; they,
    however, came together again to eat their meal in common, being quite
    guiltless of any improper conduct. [5] but since my edict forbidding
    (as you ordered) all secret societies, they had given this practice
    up. however, i thought it necessary to apply the torture to some young
    women who were called _ministrae_, [6] in order, if possible, to
    find out the truth. but i could elicit nothing from them except
    evidence of some debased and immoderate superstition; so i deferred
    the trial, and determined to ask your advice. for the matter seemed
    important, especially since the number of those who run into danger
    increases daily. all ages, all ranks, and both sexes are among the
    accused, and the taint of the superstition is not confined to the
    towns; it has actually made its way into the villages. but i believe
    it possible to cheek and repress it. at all events it is certain that
    temples which were lately almost empty are now well attended, and
    sacred festivals long disused are being revived. victims too are
    flowing in, whereas a few years ago such things could scarcely find a
    purchaser. from this i infer that vast numbers might be reformed if an
    opportunity of recantation were allowed them."

trajan's reply, brief, clear, and to the point, as all his letters are, is
as follows:--

    "i entirely approve of your conduct with regard to those christians of
    whom you had received information. we can never lay down a universal
    rule, as if circumstances were always the same. they are not to be
    searched for; but if they are reported and convicted, they must be
    punished. but if any denies his christianity and proves his words by
    sacrificing to our divinity, even though his former conduct may have
    laid him under suspicion, he must be allowed the benefit of his
    recantation. no weight whatever should be attached to anonymous
    communications; they are no roman way of dealing, and are altogether
    reprehensible."

pliny died in 113. he shone in nearly every department of literature, and
thought himself no inelegant poet. his vanity has led him to record some
of his verses, but they only show that he had little or no talent in this
direction. his long and prosperous life was marked by no reverse. popular
among his equals, splendid in his political successes, in his vast wealth,
and his friendship wife, the emperor, pliny is almost a perfect type of a
refined pagan gentleman. in some ways he reminds us of xenophon. he was in
complete harmony with his age; he had neither the harassing thoughts of
seneca, nor the querulousness of his uncle, nor the settled gloom of
tacitus, to overcast his bright and happy disposition. few works in all
antiquity are more pleasing than his friendly correspondence. we learn
from it the names of a large number of orators and other distinguished
literary men, of whom, indeed, rome was full. voconius romanus, [7]
salvius liberalis, [8] c. fannius, [9] and claudius pollio, [10] were
among the most renowned. they are mentioned as possessing every gift that
could contribute to the highest eloquence; but as pliny's good nature
leads him to praise all his friends indiscriminately, we cannot lay much
stress on his opinion. in jurisprudence we meet with priscus neratius,
juventius celsus, and javolenus priscus. the two former were men of mark,
and obtained the consulate. the last was less distinguished, and had the
misfortune to offend pliny by an ill-timed jest. [11] once, when statius
had given a reading, and had just left the hall, the audience asked
passienus paulus, who had a manuscript ready, to take his place. paulus
was somewhat diffident, but finally consented, and began his poem with the
words, "you bid me, priscus...," on which javolenus, who was sitting near,
called out, "you mistake! i do not bid you!" the audience greeted this
sally with a laugh, and so put an end to the unlucky paulus's recitation.
pliny contemptuously remarks that it is doubtful whether javolenus was
quite sane, but admits that there are people imprudent enough to trust
their business to him. [12] we may think a single jest is somewhat scanty
evidence of _dementia_.

grammar was in this reign actively pursued. flavius caper was the author
of a treatise on orthography, and another "on doubtful words," both of
which we possess. he seems to have been a learned man, and is often quoted
by the grammarians of the fourth and fifth centuries. velius longus also
wrote on orthography, and, as we learn from gellius, a treatise _de usu
antiquae lectionis_. all the chief grammarians now exercised themselves on
the interpretation of virgil, who was fast rising into the position of an
oracle in nearly every department of learning, an elevation which, in the
time of macrobius, he had completely attained. of scientific writers we
possess in part the works of three; that of hyginus on munitions, and
another on boundaries (if indeed this last be his), which are based on
good authorities; that of balbus _on the elementary notions of geometry_;
and perhaps that of siculus flaccus, _de condidonibus agrorum_, all of
which are of importance towards a knowledge of roman surveying. it is
doubtful whether flaccus lived under trajan, but in any case he cannot be
placed later than the beginning of hadrian's reign.

the only poet of the time of trajan who has reached us, but one of the
greatest in roman literature, is d. junius juvenalis (46-130? a.d.). he
was born during the reign of claudius, and thus spent the best years of
his life under the regime of the worst emperors. his parentage is
uncertain, but he is said to have been either the son or the adopted son
of a rich freedman, and a passage in the third satire [13] seems to point
to aquinum as his birth-place. we have unfortunately scarcely any
knowledge of his life, a point to be the more regretted, as we might then
have pronounced with confidence on his character, which in the _satires_
is completely veiled. an inscription placed by him in the temple of ceres
helvina, at aquinum (probably in the reign of domitian), has been
published by mommsen. it contains one or two biographical notices, which
show that he held positions of considerable importance. [14] we have also
a memoir of him, attributed to suetonius by some, but to probus by valla,
which tells us that until middle life he practised declamation as an
amateur, neither pleading at the bar nor opening a rhetorical school. we
are informed also that under domitian he wrote a satire on the pantomime
paris, which was so highly approved by his friends that he determined to
give himself to poetry. he did not, however, publish until the reign of
trajan. it was in the time of hadrian that some of his verses on an actor
[15] were recited, probably, by the populace in a theatre, in consequence
of which the poet, now eighty years of age, was exiled under the specious
pretext of a military command, the emperor's favourite player having taken
offence at the allusion. from a reference to egypt in one of his later
satires, [16] the scholiast came to the conclusion that this was the place
of his exile. but it is more likely to have been britain, though in this
case the relegation would have taken place under trajan. [17] he appears
to have died soon after from disgust, though here the two accounts differ,
one bringing him back to rome, and making him survive until the time of
antoninus pius. the obvious inference from all this is that we know very
little about the matter. in default of external evidence we might turn to
the _satires_ themselves, but here the most careful sifting can find
nothing of importance. the great vigour of style, however, which is
conspicuous in the seventh satire makes it clear that it was not the work
of the poet's old age. hence the caesar referred to cannot be hadrian. he
must, therefore, be some earlier emperor, and there can be little doubt it
is trajan. under trajan, then, we place the maturity of juvenal's genius
as it is displayed in the first ten satires. the four following ones show
a falling off in concentration and dramatic power, and are no doubt later
productions, when years of good government had softened his asperity of
mind. the fifteenth, sixteenth, and to a certain extent the twelfth, show
unmistakable signs of senility. the fifteenth contains evidence of its
date. the consulship of juncus (127 a.d.) is mentioned as recent. [18] we
may therefore safely place the satire within the two following years. the
sixteenth, which treats of the privileges of military service, a very
promising subject, has often been thought spurious, but without sufficient
reason. the poet speaks of himself as a civilian, appearing to have no
goodwill towards the camp, and as juvenal had been in the army, it is
argued that he would scarcely have written so. but to this it may be
replied that juvenal chose the subject for its literary capabilities, not
from any personal feeling. as an expert rhetorician, he could not fail to
see the humorous side of the relations between militaire and civilian. the
feebleness of the style, and certain differences from the diction usual
with the author, are not sufficient to found an argument upon, and have
besides been much exaggerated. they would apply equally, and even with
greater force, to the fifteenth.

the words "_ad mediam fere aetatem declamavit_," as martha has justly
remarked, form the key to juvenal's literary position. he is the very
quintessence of a declaimer, but a declaimer of a most masculine sort.
boileau characterises him in two epigrammatic lines:

  "juvenal eleve dans les cris de l'ecole
  poussa jusqu'a l'exces son mordant hyperbole."

poet in the highest sense of the word he certainly is not. the love of
beauty, which is the touchstone of the poetic soul, is absent from his
works. he rather revels in depicting horror and ugliness. but the other
qualification of the poet, viz. a mastery of words, [19] he possesses to a
degree not surpassed by any roman writer, and in intensity and terseness
of language is perhaps superior to all. not an epithet is wasted, not a
synonym idle. as much is pressed into each verse as it can possibly be
made to bear, so that fully to appreciate the _satires_ it is necessary to
have a commentary on every line. even now, after the immense erudition
that has been expended on him, many passages remain obscure, not only in
respect to allusions, but even in matters of language. [20] the tension of
his style, which is never relaxed, [21] represents not only great effort,
but long-matured and late-born thought. in the angry silence of forty
years had been formed that fierce and almost brutal directness of
description which paints, as has been well said, with a vividness truly
horrible. in preaching virtue, he first frightens away modesty. there is
scarce one of his poems that does not shock even where it rebukes. and
three of them are so hideous in their wonderful power that it is
impossible to read them with any pleasure, though one of these (the sixth)
is perhaps the most vigorous piece of writing in the entire latin
language. for compressed power it may he compared to the first chorus of
the _agamemnon_ of aeschylus, but here the likeness ceases. while the
athenian, even among dreadful scenes, rises to notes of sweet and almost
divine pathos, the roman's dark picture is not relieved by one touch of
the beautiful, or one reminiscence of the ideal.

the question naturally arises, what led juvenal to write poetry after
being so long content with declamation? he partly answers us in his first
satire, where he tells us that it is in revenge for the poetry that has
been inflicted on himself:

  "semper ego auditor tantum nunquamne reponam?"

but it arises also from a higher motive--

                     "facit indignatio versum
  qualemcunque potest, quales ego vel cluvienus."

these two qualities, vexation (_vexatus toties_, i. 2) and indignation,
are the salient characteristics of juvenal. how far the vexation was
righteous, the indignation sincere, is a question hard to answer. there is
no denying the power with which they are expressed. but to submit to this
power is one thing, to sift its author's heart is another. after a long
and careful study of juvenal's poems, we confess to being able to make
nothing of juvenal himself. we cannot get even a glimpse of him. he never
doffs the iron mask, the "_rigidi censura cachinni_;" he has so long
hidden his face that he is afraid to see it himself or to let it be seen.
some have thought that in the eleventh and twelfth satires they can find
the man, and have been glad to figure him as genial, simple, and kind. but
it is by no means certain that even these are not mere rhetorical
exercises, modelled on the horatian epistles, but themselves having no
relation to any actual event. the fifteenth, again, represents a softer
view of life, the thirteenth and fourteenth a higher faith in providence;
in these, it has been thought, appears the true nature, which had allowed
itself to lie hid among the denunciations of the earlier satires. but, in
truth, the character of juvenal must be one of the _incognita_ of
literature. it is a retaliation on satire's part for the intimate
knowledge she had allowed us to gain of horace and persius through their
works. [22]

in manner juvenal is the most original of poets; in matter he is the
glorifier of common-place. his strength lies in his prejudices. he is not
a moralist, but a _roman_ moralist; the vices he lashes are not lashed as
vices _simpliciter_, but as vices that roman ethics condemn. this one-
sided patriotism is the key to all his ideas. in an age which had seen
seneca, juvenal can revert to the patriotism of cato. the burden of his
complaints is given in the third satire:

  "non possum ferre quintes graecam urbem." [23]

while the greeks lead fashion, the old roman virtues can never be
restored. if only men could be disabused of their strange reverence for
all that is greek, society might be reconstructed. the keen satirist
scents a real danger; in half a century from his death rome had become a
greek city.

in estimating the political character of juvenal's satire we must not
attach too much weight to his denunciation of former tyrants. in the first
place "_tyrannicide_" was a common-place of the schools: [24] xerxes,
periander, phalaris, and all the other despots of history, had been
treated in rhetoric as they had treated others in reality; juvenal's
tirade was nothing new, but it was something much more powerful than had
yet been seen. in the second place the policy of trajan encouraged abuse
of his predecessors. he could hardly claim to restore the republic unless
he showed how the republic had been overthrown. pliny, the courtly
flatterer, is far more severe on domitian than juvenal; and in truth such
severity was only veiled adulation. when juvenal ridicules the senate of
domitian, [25] we may believe that he desired to stimulate to independence
the senate of his day; and when he speaks of trajan, it is in language of
enthusiastic praise. [26] flattery it is not, for juvenal is no sycophant,
nor would trajan have liked him better if he had been one. indeed, with
all his invective he keeps strictly to truth; his painting of the emperors
is from the life. it is highly coloured, but not out of drawing. juvenal's
domitian is nearer to history than tacitus's tiberius.

it is in his delineations of society that juvenal is at his greatest.
there is nothing ideal about him, but his pictures of real life, allowing
for their glaring lights, have an almost overpowering truthfulness. every
grade of society is made to furnish matter for his dramatic scenes. the
degenerate noble is pilloried in the eighth, the cringing parasite in the
fifth, the vicious hypocrite in the second, the female profligate in the
sixth. it is rarely that he touches on contemporary themes. his genius was
formed in the past and feeds on bitter memories. as he says, he "kills the
dead." [27] to attack the living is neither pleasant nor safe. still, in
the historic incidents he resuscitates, a piercing eye can read a
reference to the present. hadrian's favourite actor saw himself in paris.
freedmen and upstarts could read their original in sejanus. [28] frivolous
noblemen could feel their follies rebuked in the persons of lateranus and
damasippus. [29] even an emperor might find his lesson in the gloomy
pictures of hannibal and alexander. [30] so constant is this reference to
past events that juvenal's writings may be called historic satire, as
those of tacitus satiric history.

the exaggeration of juvenal's style if employed in a different way might
have led us to suspect him of less honesty of purpose than he really has.
as it is, the very violence of his prejudices betrays an earnestness
which, if his views had been more elevated, we might have thought feigned.
a man might pretend to enthusiasm for truth, or holiness; he would hardly
pretend to enthusiasm for national exclusiveness, [31] or for the dignity
of his own profession. [32] when juvenal attacks the insolent parvenu,
[33] the bithynian or cappadocian knight, [34] the greek adventurer who
takes everything out of the roman's hands, [35] the chaldean impostor,
[36] we may be sure he means what he says.

it is true that all his accusations are not thus limited in their scope.
some are no doubt inspired by moral indignation; and the language in which
they are expressed is noble and well deserves the praise universally
accorded to it. but in other instances his patriotism obscures his moral
sense. for example, the rich upstarts against whom he is perpetually
thundering, are by no means all worthy of blame. very many of them have
obtained their wealth by honourable commerce, which the nobles were too
proud to practise, and the rewards of which they yet could not see reaped
without envy and scorn. [37] the increasing importance of the class of
_libertini_, so far from being an unmixed evil, as juvenal thinks it, was
productive of immense good. it was the first step towards the breaking
down of the party-wall of pride which, if persisted in, must have caused
the premature ruin of the empire. it familiarised men's minds with ideas
of equality, and prepared the way for the elevation to the citizenship of
those vast masses of slaves who were fast becoming an anachronism.

popular feeling was ahead of men like juvenal and tacitus in these
respects. in all cases of disturbance the senate and great literary men
sided with the old exclusive views. the emperors, as a rule, interfered
for the benefit of the slave: and this helps us to understand the
popularity of some even of the worst of their number.

juvenal, then, was not above his age, as cicero and seneca had been. he
does protest against the cruel treatment of slaves by the roman ladies;
but he nowhere exerts his eloquence to advocate their rights as men to
protection and friendship. nor does he enter a protest against the
gladiatorial shows, which was the first thing a high moralist would have
impugned, and which the christians attacked with equal enthusiasm and
courage. we observe, however, with pleasure, that as juvenal advanced in
years his tone became gentler and purer, though his literary powers
decayed. the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth satires evince a kindly
vein which we fail to find in the earlier ones. some have fancied that in
the interval he became acquainted with the teaching of christianity. but
this is a supposition as improbable as it is unsupported.

on the style of juvenal but little need be added. its force, brevity, and
concision have already been noticed, at the same time they do not seem to
have been natural to him. where he writes more easily he is diffuse and
even verbose. the twelfth and fifteenth satires are conspicuous examples
of this. one is tempted to think that the fifteenth, had he written it
twenty years earlier, would have been compressed into half its length. the
diction is classical; but like that of tacitus, it is the classicality of
the silver age. it shows, however, no diminution of power, and the gulf
between it and that of fronto and apuleius in the next age is immense.
juvenal's language is based on a minute study of virgil; [38] his rhythm
is based rather on that of lucan, with whom in other respects he shows a
great affinity. his verse is sonorous and powerful; he is fond of the
break after the fourth foot. though monotonous, its weight makes it very
impressive; it is easily retained in the memory, and stands next to that
of virgil and lucretius as a type of what the language can achieve.

the resentment that goaded juvenal to write satire seems also to have
inspired the pen of c. cornelius tacitus. [39] he was born 54 a.d., or,
according to arnold, 57 a.d., probably in rome. his father was perhaps the
same who is alluded to by pliny [40] as procurator of belgian gaul. it is,
at any rate, certain that the historian came of a noble and wealthy stock;
his habit of thought, prejudices, and tastes all reflect these of the
highest and most exclusive society. he began the career of honours under
vespasian [41] by obtaining his quaestorship, and, some years later, the
aedileship. the dates of both these events are uncertain--another instance
of the vagueness with which writers of this time allude to the
circumstances of their own lives. we know that at twenty-one he married
the daughter of cn. julius agricola, and that he was praetor ten years
afterwards. he was also quindecimvir at the secular games under domitian
(88 a.d.). for some years he held a military command abroad, perhaps in
germany. on his return he was constant in his senatorial duties [42] and
we find him joined with pliny in the accusation of marius priscus, which
was successful but unavailing. under nerva (97 a.d.) he was made consul;
but soon retired from public life, and dedicated the rest of his days to
literature, having sketched out a vast plan of roman history the greater
part of which he lived to fulfil. the year of his death is uncertain.
brotier, followed by arnold, thinks he was prematurely cut off before the
close of trajan's reign, but it is possible he lived somewhat longer,
perhaps until 118 a.d.

the first remark one naturally makes on reading the life of tacitus, is
that he was admirably fitted by his distinguished military and political
career for the duties of a historian. gibbon said that his year in the
yeomanry had been of more service to him in describing battles than any
closet study could have been; and tacitus has this great advantage over
livy that he had helped to make history as well as to relate it. his
elevation to the rank of senator enabled him to understand the iniquity of
domitian's government in a way that would otherwise have been impossible;
and of the complicity shown by the servile fathers in their ruler's acts
of crime, he speaks in the _agricola_ with something like the shame of
repentance. his character seems to have been naturally proud and
independent, but unequal to heroism in action. like almost all literary
minds he shrunk from facing peril or discomfort, and tried to steer a
course between the harsh self-assertion of a thrasea [43] and the cringing
servility of the majority of senators. this led him to become dissatisfied
with himself, with the world, and with divine providence, [44] and has
left a stamp of profound and rebellious melancholy on all his works.

as a young man he had studied rhetoric under aper secundus, [45] and
perhaps quintilian. he pleaded with the greatest success, and pliny gives
it as his own highest ambition to be ranked next, he dare not say second,
to tacitus. [46] nor was his deliberative eloquence inferior to his
judicial. we learn, from pliny again, that there was a peculiar solemnity
in his language, which gave to all he uttered the greatest weight. the
panegyric he pronounced on virginius rufus, the man who twice refused the
chance of empire, "the best citizen of his time," was celebrated as a
model of that kind of oratory. [47]

the earliest work of his that has reached us is the _dialogus de caussis
corruptae eloquentiae_, composed under titus, or early under domitian. it
attributes the decay of eloquence to the decay of freedom; but believes in
a future development of imperial oratory under the mild sway of just
princes, founded not on feeble and repining imitation of the past, but on
a just appreciation of the qualifications attainable in the present
political conditions and state of the language. the argument is conducted
throughout with the greatest moderation, but the conclusion is decided in
favour of the modern style, if kept within proper bounds. the time of the
dialogue is laid in 75 a.d.; the speakers are curiatius maternus, aper
secundus, and vipstanus messala. the point of debate is one frequently
discussed in the schools of rhetoric, and the work may be considered as a
literary exercise; but the author must have outgrown youth when he wrote
it, and its ability is such as to give promise of commanding eminence in
the future. the style is free and flowing, and full of imitations of
cicero. this has caused some of the critics to attribute it to other
authors, as pliny the younger and quintilian, [48] who were known to be
ciceronianists. but independently of the fact that it is distinctly above
the level of these writers, we observe on looking closely many indications
of tacitus's peculiar diction. [49] the most striking personal notice
occurs in the thirteenth chapter, where the author announces his
determination to give up the life of ambition, and, like virgil, to be
content with one of literary retirement. this seems at first hard to
reconcile with the known career of tacitus; but as the dialogue bears all
the marks of early manhood, the resolve, though real, may have been a
passing one only; or, in comparison with what he felt himself capable of
doing, the activity actually displayed by him may have seemed as nothing,
and to have merited the depreciatory notice he here bestows upon it.

the work next in order of priority is the _agricola_, a biography of his
father-in-law, composed near the commencement of trajan's reign, about 98
a. d. the talent of the author has now undergone a change; he is no longer
the bright flowing spirit of the _dialogus_, who acknowledged the decline
while making the most of the excellences of his time; he has become the
stern, back-looking moralist, the burning panegyrist, whose very pictures
of virtue are the most withering rebukes of vice. this treatise represents
what teuffel calls his _sallustian_ epoch; _i.e._, a phase or period of
his mental development, in which his political and moral feeling, as well
as his literary aspirations, led him to recall the manner of the great
rhetorical biographer. the short preface, in which occurs a fierce protest
against the wickedness of the time just past, reminds us of the more
verbose but otherwise not dissimilar introduction to the _catiline_: and
the subordination of general history to the main subject of the
composition is earned out in sallust's way, but with even greater
completeness. at the same time the silver age is betrayed by the extremely
high colouring of the rhetoric, especially in the last chapters, where an
impassioned outpouring of affection and despair seems by its prophetic
eloquence to summon forth the genius that is to be. already, in this work,
[50] we find that tacitus has conceived the design of his _historiae_, to
which, therefore, the _agricola_ must be considered a preliminary study.

as yet, tacitus's manner is only half-formed. he must have acquired by
painful labour that wonderful suggestive brevity which in the _annals_
reaches its culmination, and is of all styles the world of letters has
ever seen, the most compressed and full of meaning. the _germania_,
however, in certain portions [51] approximates to it, and in other ways
shows a slight increase of maturity over the biography of agricola. his
object in writing this treatise has been much contested. some think it was
in order to dissuade trajan from a projected expedition that he painted
the german people as foes so formidable; others that it is a satire on the
vices of rome couched under the guise of an innocent ethnographic
treatise; others that it is inspired by the genuine scientific desire to
investigate the many objects of historic and natural interest with which a
vast and almost unknown territory abounded. but none of these motives
supplies a satisfactory explanation. the first can hardly be maintained
owing to historical difficulties; the second, though an object congenial
to the roman mind, is not lofty enough to have moved the pen of tacitus;
the third, though it may have had some weight with him, would argue a
state of scientific curiosity in advance of tacitus's position and age,
and besides is incompatible with his culpable laziness in sifting
information on matters of even still greater ethnographic interest. [52]

the true motive was no doubt his fear lest the continual assaults of these
tribes should prove a permanent and insurmountable danger to rome. having
in all probability been himself employed in germany, tacitus had seen with
dismay of what stuff the nation was made, and had foreseen what the defeat
of varus might have remotely suggested, that some day the degenerate
romans would be no match for these hardy and virtuous tribes. thus, the
design of the work was purely and pre-eminently patriotic; nor is any
other purpose worthy of the great historian, patrician, patriot, and
soldier that he was. at the same time subsidiary motives are not excluded;
we may well believe that the gall of satire kindles his eloquence, and
that the insatiable desire of knowledge stimulates his research while
inquiring into the less accessible details of the german polity. the work
is divided into two parts. the first gives an account of the situation,
climate, soil, and inhabitants of the country; it investigates the
etymology of several german names of men and gods, describes the national
customs, religion, laws, amusements, and especially celebrates the
people's moral strictness; but at the same time not without contrasting
them unfavourably with rome whenever the advantage is on her side. the
second part contains a catalogue of the different tribes, with the
geographical limits, salient characteristics, and a short historical
account of each, whenever accessible.

next come the _histories_, which are a narrative of the reigns of galba,
otho, vitellius, vespasian, titus, and domitian, written under trajan.
this work, of which we possess only four entire books, with part of the
fifth, consisted originally of fourteen books, and was the most authentic
and complete of all his writings. the loss of the last nine and a half
books must be considered irreparable. in the _germania_ he had shown the
power of that liberty which the barbarians enjoyed, had indicated their
polity, in which, even then the germs of feudalism, chivalry, the worship
of the sex, troubadour minstrelsy, fairy mythology, and, above all,
representative government, existed. in the _historiae_ he paints with
tremendous power the disorganisation, of the roman state, the military
anarchy which made the diadem the gift of a brutal soldiery, and revealed
the startling truth that an emperor could be created elsewhere than at
rome.

at this period his style still retains some traces of its former copious
flow; it has not yet been pressed tight into the short _sententiae_, which
were its final and most characteristic development, and which in the
_annals_ dominate to the exclusion of every other style.

the _annals, ab excessu divi augusti_, in sixteen books, treated the
history of the empire until the extinction of the claudian dynasty. they
contain two separate threads of history, one internal, the other external.
the latter is important and interesting; but the former is both in an
immeasurably greater degree. it has been likened to a tragedy in two acts,
the first terminating with the death of tiberius, the second with the
death of nero. tacitus in this work shows his personal sympathies more
strongly than in any of the others. he appears as a roman of the old
school, but still more, as an oligarchical partisan. not that he indulged
in chimerical plans for restoring the republic. that he saw was
impossible; nor had he much sympathy with those who strove for it. but his
resignation to the empire as an unavoidable evil does not inspire him with
contentment. his blood boils with indignation at the steady repression of
the liberty of action of the old families, which the instincts of
imperialism forced upon the monarchs from the very beginning; nor do the
general security of life and property, the bettered condition of the
provinces, and the long peace that had allowed the internal resources of
the empire to be developed, make amends for what he considers the
iniquitous tyranny practised upon the higher orders of the state. thus he
writes under a strong sense of injustice, which reaches its culmination in
treating of the earlier reigns. but this does not provoke him into
intemperate language, far less into misrepresentation of fact; if he
disdained to complain, he disdained still more to falsify. but he cannot
help insinuating; and his insinuations are of such searching power that,
once suggested, they grasp hold of the mind, and will not be shaken off.
of all latin authors none has so much power over the reader as tacitus. if
by eloquence is meant the ability to persuade, then he is the most
eloquent historian that ever existed. to doubt his judgment is almost to
be false to the conscience of history. nevertheless, his saturnine
portraits have been severely criticised both by english and french
historians, and the arguments for the defence put forward with enthusiasm
as well as force. the result is, that tacitus's verdict has been shaken,
but not reversed. the surpassing vividness of such characters as his
tiberius and nero forbids us to doubt their substantial reality. but once
his prepossessions are known and discounted, the student of his works can
give a freer attention to the countervailing facts, which tacitus is too
honourable to hide.

after long wavering between the two styles, he adopted the brilliant one
fashionable in his time, but he has glorified it in adopting it. periods
such as those of pliny would be frigid in him. he still retains some
traces (though they are few) of the rhetorician. in an interesting passage
he complains of the comparative poverty of his subject as contrasted with
that of livy: "ingentia illi bella, expugnationes urbium, fusos captosque
reges libero egressu memorabant; nobis in arcto et inglorius labor. immota
quippe aut modice lacessita pax maestae urbis res et princeps proferendi
imperii incuriosus;"--[53] but he certainly had no cause to complain. the
sombre annals of the empire were not less amenable to a powerful dramatic
treatment than the vigorous and aggressive youth of the republic had been.
nor does the story of guilt and horror depicted in the _annals_ fall below
even the finest scenes of livy; in intensity of interest it rather exceeds
them.

tacitus intended to have completed his labours by a history of augustus's
reign, which, however, he did not live to write. this is a great
misfortune. but he has left us his opinion on the character and policy of
augustus in the first few chapters of the _annals_, and a very valuable
opinion it is. what makes the historian more bitter in the _annals_ than
elsewhere, is the feeling that it was the early emperors who inaugurated
the evil policy which their successors could hardly help themselves in
carrying out. when the failure of piso's conspiracy destroyed the last
hopes of the aristocracy, it was hardly possible to retain for the later
emperors the same intense hatred that had been felt for those whose
tyranny fostered, and then remorselessly crushed, the resistance of the
patrician party. the _annals_, therefore, though the most concentrated,
powerful, and dramatic of tacitus's works, hardly rank quite so high in a
purely historical point of view as the _histories_; as merivale has said,
_they are all satire_.

at the same time, his facts are quite trustworthy. we know from pliny's
letters that he took great pains to get at the most authentic sources, and
beyond doubt he was well qualified to judge in cases of conflicting
evidence. these diverse excellences, in the opinion of niebuhr and arnold,
place him indisputably at the head of the roman historians. we cannot
better close this account than in the eloquent words of a french writer:
[54] "in tacitus subjectivity predominates; the anger and pity which in
turn never cease to move him, give to his style an expressiveness, a rich
glow of sentiment, of which antiquity affords no other example. this
constant union between the dramatic and pathetic elements, together with
the directness, energy, and reality of the language, must act with
irresistible force upon every reader. tacitus is a poet; but a poet that
has a spirit of his own. was he as fully appreciated in his own day as he
is in ours? we doubt it. the horrors, the degeneracy of his time, awake in
his brooding soul the altogether modern idea of national expiation and
national chastisement. the historian rises to the sublimity of the judge.
he summons the guilty to his tribunal, and it is in the name of the future
and of posterity that he pronounces the implacable and irreversible
verdict."

the poetical and greek constructions with which tacitus's style abounds,
the various artifices whereby he relieves the tedium of monotonous
narrative, or attains brevity or variety, have been so often analysed in
well-known grammatical treatises that it is unnecessary to do more than
allude to them here.




chapter viii.

the reigns of hadrian and the antonines (117-180 a.d.).


we now enter on a new and in some respects a very interesting era. from
the influence exerted on the last period by the family of seneca, we might
call it the epoch of spanish latinity; from the similar influence now
exerted by the african school, we might call the present the epoch of
african latinity. its chief characteristic is ill-digested erudition.
various circumstances combined to make a certain amount of knowledge
general, and the growing cosmopolitan sentiment excited a strong interest
in every kind of exotic learning. with increased diffusion depth was
necessarily sacrificed. the emperor set the example of travel, which was
eagerly followed by his subjects. hence a large mass of information was
acquired, which injuriously affected those who possessed it. they appear,
as it were, crushed by its weight, and become learned triflers or
uninteresting pedants. by far the most considerable writer of this period
was suetonius, but then he had been trained in the school of pliny, of
whom for several years he was an intimate friend. hadrian himself (76-138
a.d.), among his many other accomplishments, gave some attention to
letters. speeches, treatises of various kinds, anecdotes, and a collection
of oracles, are ascribed to his pen. also certain epigrams which we still
possess, and chiefly that exquisite address to his soul, composed on his
death-bed: [1]

  "animala vagula blandula
  hospes comesque corporis
  quae nunc abibis in loca,
  pallidula rigida nudula?
  nec ut soles dabis iocos."

hadrian was also a patron of letters, though an inconstant one. his vanity
led him to wish to have distinguished writers about him, but it also led
him to wish to be ranked as himself the most distinguished. his own taste
was good; he appreciated and copied the style of the republican age; but
he encouraged the pedantic fronto, whose taste was corrupt and ruinously
influential. so that while with one hand he benefited literature, with the
other he injured it.

the birth year of c. suetonius tranquillus is uncertain, but may be
assigned with probability to 75 a.d. [2] we may here remark the
extraordinary reticence of the later writers on the subject of their
younger days. seneca alone is communicative. all the rest show an oblivion
or indifference most unlike the genial communicativeness of cicero,
horace, and ovid. his father was one suetonius lenis, a military tribune
and wearer of the angusticlave. muretus, however, desirous to give him a
more illustrious origin, declares that his father was the suetonius
paulinus mentioned by tacitus. we learn a good deal of his younger days
from the letters of pliny, and can infer something of his character also.
in conformity with what we know from other sources of the tendencies of
the age, we find that he was given to superstition. [3] at this time
(_i.e._ under trajan) suetonius wavered between a literary and a political
career. pliny was able and willing to help him in the latter, and got him
appointed to the office of tribune (102 a.d.). [4] some years later (112
a.d.), he procured for him the _jus trium liberorum_, though suetonius was
childless. we see that augustus's excellent institutions had already
turned into an abuse. the means for keeping up the population had become a
compensation for domestic unhappiness. [5] suetonius practised for some
years at the bar, and seems to have amassed a considerable fortune. we
find him begging pliny to negotiate for him for the purchase of an estate.
[6] shortly after this he was promoted to be hadrian's secretary, which
gave him an excellent opportunity of enriching his stores of knowledge
from the imperial library. of this opportunity he made excellent use, and
after his disgrace, owing, it is said, to too great familiarity with, the
empress (119 a.d.), he devoted his entire time to those multifarious and
learned works, which gave him the position of the varro of the imperial
period. his life was prolonged for many years, probably until 160 a.d. [7]

the writings of suetonius were encyclopaedic. following the culture of his
day, he seems to have written partly in greek, partly in latin. this had
been also the practice of cicero, and of many of the greatest republican
authors. the difference between them lies, not in the fact that
suetonius's greek was better, but that his latin is less good. instead of
a national it is fast becoming a cosmopolitan dialect. still suetonius
tried to form his taste on older and purer models, and is far removed from
the denationalised school of fronto and apuleius.

the titles of his works are a little obscure. both, following suidas,
gives the following. (1) _peri ton par ellaesi paidion biblion_, a book of
games. this is quoted or paraphrased by tzetzes, [8] and several excerpts
from it are preserved in eustathius. it was no doubt written in greek, but
perhaps in latin also. (2) _peri ton para romaiois theorion kai agonon
biblia g_, an account in three books of the roman spectacles and games, of
which an interesting fragment on the troia ludus is preserved by
tertullian. [9] (3) _peri tou kata romaious eniautou biblion_, an
archaeological investigation into the theory of the roman year. (4) _peri
ton en tois bibliois saemeion_, on the signification of rare words. (5)
_peri taes kikeronos politeias_, a justification of the conduct of cicero,
in opposition to some of his now numerous detractors, especially one
didymus, a conceited alexandrine, called chalcenterus, "the man of iron
digestion," on account of his immense powers of work. (6) _peri onomaton
kai ideas esthaematon kai upodaematon_, a treatise on the different names
of shoes, coats, and other articles of dress. this may seem a trivial
subject; but, after carlyle, we can hardly deny its capability of throwing
light on great matters. besides, in ancient times dress had a religious
origin, and in many cases a religious significance. and two passages from
the work preserved by servius, [10] are important from this point of view.
(7) _peri dusphaemon lexeon aetoi blasphaemiom_, an inquiry into the
origin and etymology of the various terms of abuse employed in
conversation and literature. this was almost certainly written in greek.
(8) _peri romaes kai ton en autae nomimon kai aethon biblia b_, a succinct
account of the chief roman customs, of which only a short passage on the
triumph has come down to us through isidore. [11] (9) _syngenikon
kaisaron_, [12] a biography of the twelve caesars, divided into eight
books. (10) _stemma romaion andron episaemon_, a gallery of illustrious
men, the plan of which was followed by jerome in his history of the
worthies of the church. but suetonius's catalogue seems to have been
confined to those eminent in literature, and to have treated only of
poets, orators, historians, philosophers, grammarians, and rhetoricians.
of this we possess considerable fragments, especially the account of the
grammarians, and the lives of terence, horace, and pliny. (11) _peri
episaemon pornon_, an account of those courtesans who had become renowned
through their wit, beauty, or genius. (12) _de vitiis corporalibus_, a
list of bodily defects, written perhaps to supplement the medical works of
celsus and scribonius largus. (13) _de institutione officiorum_, a manual
of rank as fixed by law, and of social and court etiquette. this, did we
possess it, would be highly interesting, and might throw light on many now
obscure points. (14) _de regibus_, in three books, containing short