the palais gallien at bordeaux




the upper dordogne.

i had left the volcanic mountains of auvergne and had passed through
mont-dore and la bourboule, following the course of the dordogne that
flowed through the valley with the bounding spirits of a young mountaineer
descending for the first time towards the great plains where the large
towns and cities lie with all their fancied wonders and untasted charm.

but these towns and cities were afar off. the young dordogne had a very
long journey to make before reaching the plains of perigord. nearly the
whole of this distance the stream would have to thread its way through
deep-cut gorges and ravines, where the dense forest reaches down to the
stony channel, save where the walls of rock rising hundreds of feet on
either side are too steep for vegetation. above the forest and the rock
is the desert moor, horrible to the peasant, but to the lover of nature
beautiful when seen in its dress of purple heather and golden broom.

[illustration: a bit of auvergne.]

i had not been long on the road this day, when i saw coming towards me an
equipage more picturesquely interesting than any i had ever met in the
champs-elysees. it was a ramshackle little cart laden with sacks and a
couple of children, and drawn by a pair of shaggy sheep-dogs. cords served
for harness. a man was running by the side, and it was as much as he could
do to keep up with the animals. this use of dogs is considered cruel in
england, but it often keeps them out of mischief, and i have never seen one
in harness that looked unhappy. traces must help a dog to grow in his own
esteem, and to work out his ideal of the high destiny reserved for him;
or why does he, when tied under a cart to which a larger quadruped is
harnessed, invariably try to persuade himself and others that he is pulling
the load up the hill, and that the horse or donkey is an impostor?

[illustration: the dordogne at la bourboule.]

the width of the mont-dore valley decreased rapidly, and i entered the
gorge of the dordogne, where basaltic rocks were thrown up in savage
grandeur, vividly contrasting with which were bands and patches of meadow,
brilliantly green. yellow spikes of agrimony and the fine pink flowers of
the musk-mallow mingled with the wiry broom and the waving bracken about
the rocks.

it was september, but the summer heat had returned, and when the road
passed through a beech wood the shade was welcome. here over the mossy
ground rambled the enchanter's nightshade, still carrying its frail white
flowers, which really have a weird appearance in the twilight of the woods.
the plant has not been called _circe_ without a reason. under the beeches
there were raspberry canes with some fruit still left upon them. after
leaving the wood, the scene became more wild and craggy. the basalt, bare
and sombre, or sparsely flecked with sedums, their stalks and fleshy leaves
now very red, rose sheer from the middle of the narrow valley, down which
the stream sped like fleeing arethusa, now turning to the right, now to the
left, foaming over rocks or sparkling like the facets of countless gems
between margins of living green.

then i left the valley in order to pass through the village of st. sauve
on the right-hand hill. there was little there worth seeing besides a very
ancient romanesque archway, or, as some think, detached portico leading to
the church.

many of the women of st. sauve wore the black cap or bonnet of mont-dore,
which hangs to the shoulders. it is a hideous coiffure, but an interesting
relic of the past. the prototype of it was worn by the chatelaines of the
twelfth century. then, however, it had a certain stateliness which it lacks
now. it is only to be seen in a very small district.

i consulted some of the people of st. sauve respecting my plan of following
the dordogne through its gorges. they did not laugh at me, but they looked
at me in a way which meant that if better brains had not been given to them
than to me their case would be indeed unfortunate. i was advised to see a
cobbler who was considered an authority on the byways of the district. i
found him sitting by the open window of his little shop driving hob-nails
into a pair of sunday boots. when i told him what i had made up my mind to
do, he shook his head, and, laying down his work, said:

'you will never do it. there are rocks, and rocks, and rocks. even the
fishermen, who go where anybody can go, do not try to follow the dordogne
very far. there are ravines--and ravines. _bon dieu!_ and the forest! you
will be lost! you will be devoured!'

to be devoured would be the climax of misfortune. i wished to know what
animals would be likely to stop my wayfaring in this effectual manner.

'are there wolves?'

'no; none have been seen for years.'

'are there boars?'

'yes, plenty of them.'

'but boars,' i said, 'are not likely to interfere with me.'

'that is true,' replied the local wiseacre, 'so long as you keep walking;
but if you fall down a rock--ah!'

'i would not care to have you for a companion, with all your local
knowledge,' i thought, as i thanked the cobbler and turned down a very
stony path towards the dordogne. it is always prudent to follow the advice
of those who are better informed than yourself; but it is much more
amusing--for awhile--to go your own way. i had lunched, and was prepared
to battle with the desert for several hours. it was now past mid-day,
and notwithstanding the altitude, the heat was very great. but for the
discomfort that we endure from the sun's rays we are more than amply
compensated by the pleasure that the recollection brings us in winter, when
the north wind is moaning through the sunless woods and the dreary fog
hangs over the cities. when i again reached the dordogne there was no
longer any road, but only a rough path through high bracken, heather and
broom. snakes rustled as i passed, and hid themselves among the stones. the
cobbler had forgotten to include these with the dangers to be encountered.
to my mind they were much more to be dreaded than the boars, for these
stony solitudes swarm with adders, of which the most venomous kind is the
red viper, or _aspic_. its bite has often proved mortal.

the path entered the forest which covers the steep sides of the
ever-winding gorge of the dordogne for many leagues, only broken where the
rocks are so nearly vertical that no soil has ever formed upon them, except
in the little crevices and upon the ledges, where the hellebore, the sedum,
the broom, and other unambitious plants which love sterility flourish where
the foot of man has never trod.

the rocks were now of gneiss and mica-schist, and the mica was so abundant
as to cause many a crag and heap of shale to glitter in the sun, as though
there had been a mighty shattering of mirrors here into little particles
which had fallen upon everything. there was, however, no lack of contrast.
to the shining rocks and the fierce sunshine, which seemed to concentrate
its fire wherever it fell in the open spaces of the deep gorge, succeeded
the ancient forest and its cool shade; but the darkly-lying shadows were
ever broken with patches of sunlit turf. pines and firs reached almost to
the water's edge, and the great age of some of them was a proof of the
little value placed upon timber in a spot so inaccessible. one fir had an
enormous bole fantastically branched like that of an english elm, and
on its mossy bark was a spot such as the hand might cover, fired by a
wandering beam, that awoke recollections of the dream-haunted woods before
the illusion of their endlessness was lost.

the afternoon was not far spent, when i began to feel a growing confidence
in the value of the cobbler's information, and a decreasing belief in my
own powers. it became more and more difficult, then quite impossible,
to keep along the bank of the stream. what is understood by a bank
disappeared, and in its stead were rocks, bare and glittering, on which the
lizards basked, or ran in safety, because they were at home, but which i
could only pass by a flank movement. to struggle up a steep hill, over
slipping shale-like stones, or through an undergrowth of holly and
brambles, then to scramble down and to climb again, repeating the exercise
every few hundred yards, may have a hygienic charm for those who are
tormented by the dread of obesity, but to other mortals it is too
suggestive of a holiday in purgatory.

having gone on in this fashion for some distance, i lay down, streaming
from every pore, and panting like a hunted hare beside a little rill that
slid singing between margins of moss, amid circe's white flowers and purple
flashes of cranesbill. here i examined my scratches and the state of things
generally. the result of my reflections was to admit that the cobbler
was right, that these ravines of the upper dordogne were practically
impassable, and that the only rational way of following the river would
be to keep sometimes on the hills and sometimes in the gorge, as the
unforeseen might determine. hitherto, i had not troubled to inquire where i
should pass the night, and this consideration alone would have compelled
me to depart from my fantastic scheme. after la bourboule there is not a
village or hamlet in the valley of the dordogne for a distance of at least
thirty miles, allowing for the winding of the stream.

after a hard climb i reached the plateau, where i saw before me a wide moor
completely covered with bracken and broom. here i looked at the map, and
decided to make towards a village called messeix, lying to the east in a
fork formed by the dordogne and its tributary the chavannon. going by the
compass at first, i presently struck a road leading across the moor in the
right direction. i passed through two wretched hamlets, in neither of which
was there an auberge where i could relieve my thirst. at the second one a
cottage was pointed out to me where i was told a woman sold wine. when,
after sinking deep in mud, i found her amidst a group of hovels, and the
preliminary salutation was given, the following conversation passed between
us:

'they tell me you sell wine.'

'they tell you wrong--i don't.'

'do you sell milk, then?'

'no; i have no beasts.'

as i was going away she kindly explained that she only kept enough wine for
herself. i had evidently not impressed her favourably. although i think
water a dangerous drink in france, except where it can be received directly
from the hand of nature, far from human dwellings, i was obliged to beg
some in this place, and run the risk of carrying away unfriendly microbes.

having left the hovels behind me, the country became less barren or more
cultivated. there were fields of rye, buckwheat, and potatoes, but always
near them lay the undulating moor, gilded over with the flowers of a dwarf
broom. it was evening when i descended into a wide valley from which came
the chime of cattle-bells, mingled with the barking of dogs and the voices
of children, who were driving the animals slowly homeward. there were green
meadows below me, over which was a yellow gleam from the fading afterglow
of sunset, and in the air was that odour which, rising from grassy valleys
at the close of day, even in regions burnt by the southern summer, makes
the wandering englishman fancy that some wayfaring wind has come laden with
the breath of his native land. suddenly turning a corner, i so startled a
little peasant girl sitting on a bank in the early twilight with a flock
of goats about her, that she opened her mouth and stared at me as though
croquemitaine had really shown himself at last. the goats stopped eating,
and fixed upon me their eyes like glass marbles; they, too, thought that i
could be no good.

i hoped that the village of messeix was in this valley; but no, i had to
cross it and climb the opposite hill. on the other side i found the place
that i had fixed upon for my night quarters.

very small and very poor, it lies in a region where the land generally is
so barren that but a small part of it has been ever broken by the plough;
where the summers are hot and dry, and the winters long and cruel. although
in the watershed of the gironde, it touches auvergne, and its altitude
makes it partake very much of the auvergnat climate, which, with the
exception of the favoured limagne valley, is harsh, to an extent that has
caused many a visitor to flee from mont-dore in the month of august. in the
deep gorges of the dordogne and its tributaries, the snow rarely lies more
than a few days upon the ground, whereas upon the wind-swept plateau above
the scanty population have to contend with the rigours of that french
siberia which may be said to commence here on the west, and to extend
eastward over the whole mass of metamorphic and igneous rocks, which is
termed the great central plateau of france, although it lies far south of
the true centre of the country.

at the first auberge where i applied for a night's lodging, an elderly
woman with a mournful face declined to take me in, and gave no reason. when
i had left, she came after me and said, with her eyes full of tears:

'i have a great trouble in the house, that is why i sent you away.'

i understood what she meant; somebody dear to her was dying. a man who was
listening said his brother-in-law, the baker, was also an innkeeper, and he
offered to take me to the auberge. i gladly consented, for i was fearful of
being obliged to tramp on to some other place. presently i was in a large,
low room, which was both kitchen and baker's shop. on shelves were great
wheel-shaped loaves (they are called _miches_ in the provinces), some about
two feet in diameter, made chiefly of rye with a little wheaten flour.
filled sacks were ranged along the wall. in a deep recess were the
kneading-trough, and the oven, now cold. the broad rural hearth, with its
wood-fire and sooty chimney, the great pot for the family soup hanging to a
chain, took up a large share of the remaining space. i sat upon a rickety
chair beside a long table that had seen much service, but was capable of
seeing a great deal more, for it had been made so as to outlast generations
of men. bare-footed children ran about upon the black floor, and a thin,
gaunt young woman, who wore very short petticoats, which revealed legs not
unlike those of the table, busied herself with the fire and the pot. she
was the sister of the children, and had been left in charge of the house
while her father and mother were on a journey. she accepted me as a lodger,
but for awhile she was painfully taciturn. this, however, her scanty
knowledge of french, and the fact that a stranger even of the class of
small commercial travellers was a rare bird in the village, fully accounted
for. the place was not cheerful, but as i listened to the crickets about
the hearth, and watched the flames leap up and lick the black pot, my
spirits rose. presently the church bell sounded, dong, dong, dong.

'why are they tolling the bell?' i asked.

'because,' replied the gaunt young woman, 'a man has died in the village.'

by pressing her to speak, she explained that while a corpse lay unburied
the bell was tolled three times in the day--early in the morning, at
mid-day, and at nightfall. the conversation was in darkness, save such
light as the fire gave. it was not until the soup was ready that the lamp
was lighted. then the young woman, addressing me abruptly, said:

'cut up your bread for your soup.'

i did as i was told, for i always try to accommodate myself to local
customs, and never resent the rough manners of well-intentioned people. the
bread was not quite black, but it was very dark from the amount of rye that
was in it. the soup was water flavoured with a suggestion of fat bacon,
whatever vegetables happened to be in the way, and salt. this fluid, poured
over bread--when the latter is not boiled with it--is the chief sustenance
of the french peasant. it was all that the family now had for their evening
meal, and in five minutes everyone had finished. they drank no wine; it
was too expensive for them, the nearest vineyard being far away. a bottle,
however, was placed before me, but the quality was such that i soon left
it. to get some meat for me the village had to be scoured, and the result
was a veal cutlet.

i was not encouraged to sit up late. as the eldest daughter of the inn
showed me my night quarters, she said:

'your room is not beautiful, but the bed is clean.'

this was quite true. the room, in accordance with a very frequent
arrangement in these rural auberges, was not used exclusively for sleeping
purposes, but also for the entertainment of guests, especially on fair and
market days, when space is precious. there was a table with a bench for the
use of drinkers. there were, moreover, three beds, but i was careful to
ascertain that none would be occupied except by myself. i would sooner
have slept on a bundle of hay in the loft than have had an unknown person
snoring in the same room with me. one has always some prejudice to
overcome. the bed was not soft, and the hempen sheets were as coarse as
canvas, but these trifles did not trouble me. i listened to the song of
the crickets on the hearth downstairs until drowsiness beckoned sleep and
consciousness of the present lost its way in sylvan labyrinths by the
dordogne.

at six o'clock the next morning i was walking about the village, and i
entered the little church, already filled with people. it was sunday, and
this early mass was to be a funeral one. the man for whom the bell was
tolled last night was soon brought in, the coffin swathed in a common
sheet. it was borne up the nave towards the catafalque, the rough carpentry
of which showed how poor the parish was. following closely was an old and
bent woman with her head wrapped in a black shawl. she had hardly gone a
few steps, when her grief burst out into the most dismal wailing i had ever
heard, and throughout the service her melancholy cries made other women
cover their faces, and tears start from the eyes of hard-featured,
weather-beaten men.

[illustration: a moorland widow.]

most of the women present wore the very ugly headgear which is the most
common of all in auvergne and the correze, namely, a white cap covered by
a straw bonnet something of the coal-scuttle pattern. there were many
communicants at this six o'clock mass, and what struck me as being the
reverse of what one might suppose the right order of things, was that the
women advanced in life wore white veils as they knelt at the altar rails,
while those worn by the young, whose troubles were still to come, were
black. these veils were carried in the hand during the earlier part of the
rite. throughout a very wide region of southern france the custom prevails.
the church belonged to different ages. upon the exterior of the romanesque
apse were uncouth carvings in relief of strange animal figures. they were
more like lions than any other beasts, but their outlines were such as
children might have drawn.

i returned to the inn. the baker had come back, and was preparing to heat
his oven with dry broom. i learned that he had not only to bake the bread
that he sold, but also the coarser rye loaves which were brought in by
those who had their own flour, but no oven. three francs was the charge for
my dinner, bed, and breakfast. the score settled and civilities exchanged,
i walked out of messeix, expecting to strike the valley of the dordogne not
very far to the south. the landscape was again that of the moorland. on
each side of the long, dusty line called a road spread the brown turf,
spangled with the pea-flowers of the broom or stained purple with heather.
there were no trees, but two wooden crosses standing against the gray sky
looked as high as lofty pines. i met little bands of peasants hurrying
to church, and i reached the village of savennes just before the _grand
messe_. many people were sitting or standing outside the church--even
sitting on the cemetery wall. when the bell stopped and they entered,
literally like a flock of sheep into a fold, all could not find room
inside, so the late-comers sat upon the ground in the doorway, or as near
as they could get to it. as the people inside knelt or stood, so did they
who had been left, not out in the cold, but in the heat, for the sun had
broken through the mist, and the weather was sultry. as i walked round the
church i found women sitting with open books and rosaries in their hands
near the apse, amidst the yarrow and mulleins of forgotten grave mounds.
they were following the service by the open window. i lingered about the
cemetery reading the quaint inscriptions and noting the poor emblems upon
wooden crosses not yet decayed, picking here and there a wild flower, and
watching the butterflies and bees until the old priest, who was singing the
mass in a voice broken by time, having called upon his people to 'lift up
their hearts,' they answered: '_habemus ad dominum_.'

i had a simple lunch at a small inn in this village, where i was watched
with much curiosity by an old man in a blouse with a stiff shirt-collar
rising to his ears, and a nightcap with tassel upon his head. the widow who
kept the inn had a son who offered to walk with me as far as some chapel
in the gorge of the chavannon. we were not long in reaching the gorge, the
view of which from the edge of the plateau was superbly savage. descending
a very rugged path through the forest that covered the sides of the deep
fissure, save where the stark rock refused to be clothed, we came to a
small chapel, centuries old, under a natural wall of gneiss, but deep in
the shade of overhanging boughs. it was dedicated to st. john the baptist,
and on st. john's day mass was said in it, and the spot was the scene of a
pilgrimage. outside was a half-decayed moss-green wooden platform on which
the priest stood while he preached to the assembled pilgrims. the young
man left me, and i went on alone into the more sombre depths of the gorge,
where i reached the single line of railway that runs here through some of
the wildest scenery in france. i kept on the edge of it, where walking,
although very rough, was easier than on the steep side of the split that
had here taken place in the earth's crust. upon the narrow stony strip of
comparatively level ground the sun's rays fell with concentrated ardour,
and along it was a brilliant bloom of late summer flowers--of camomile, st.
john's wort, purple loosestrife, hemp-agrimony and lamium. at almost every
step there was a rustle of a lizard or a snake. the melancholy cry of the
hawk was the only sound of bird-life. near rocks of dazzling mica-schist
was a miserable hut with a patch of buckwheat reaching to the stream. a man
standing amidst the white flowers of the late-sown crop said, in answer to
my questioning, that i could not possibly reach the village of port-dieu
without walking upon the line and through the tunnels.

when i had left him about fifty yards behind, his curiosity proved more
than he could bear in silence; so he called out to me, in the bad french
that is spoken hereabouts by those who use it only as the language of
strangers: '_quel metier que vous faites?_'

i waved my hand in reply and left him to his conjectures.

on i went, now over the glittering stones, now wading through the pink
flowers of saponaria, then in a mimic forest of tall angelica by the
water's edge, until i realized that the peasant's information was
sound--that it was impossible to walk through this gorge except upon the
railway.

presently the rocks rose in front of me and the line disappeared into the
darkness of a tunnel. i did not like the idea of entering this black hole,
for i had brought no candle with me, but the prospect of climbing the rocks
was still more forbidding. it proved to be a short and straight tunnel with
daylight shining at the farther end. after this came another short one, but
the third was much longer and had a curve; consequently i was soon in total
darkness. the only danger to be feared was a passing train, so i felt with
my stick for the wires between the rock and the metals, and crept along by
them. from being broiled by the sun ten minutes before i was now shivering
from the cold. i longed to see again the flowers basking under the warm
sky, and to hear the grasshoppers' happy song. by-and-by i saw the blessed
light flashing at the end of the black bore. when i came out again into the
sunshine, i was following, not the chavannon, but the dordogne.

the gorge widened into a valley, where there were scattered cottages, cows,
sheep, and goats. here i found a fair road on the western side of the
river, in the department of the correze, and being now free of mind, i
loitered on the way, picking strawberries and watching the lizards. it
was dark when, descending again to the level of the dordogne, i sought a
lodging in the little village of port-dieu. i stopped at a cottage inn,
where an old man soon set to work at the wood-fire and cooked me a dinner
of eggs and bacon and fried potatoes. he was a rough cook, but one very
anxious to please. the room where i passed the night had a long table in
it, and benches. there was no blanket on the bed, only a sheet and a heavy
patchwork quilt. ah, yes, there was something else, carefully laid upon the
quilt. this was a linen bag without an opening, which, when spread out,
tapered towards the ends. had i not known something about the old-fashioned
nightcap, i should have puzzled a long time before discovering what i was
expected to do with this object. the matter is simple to those who know
that the cap is formed by turning one of the ends in. there were mosquitoes
in the room, but they sang me to sleep, and if they amused themselves at my
expense afterwards, i was quite unconscious of it.

the murmur of the rushing dordogne mingled not unpleasantly with the
impressions of dreams as i awoke. i got up and opened the small worm-eaten
window-frame. high thatched roofs, not many yards in front, were covered
with moss, which the morning rays, striking obliquely, painted the heavenly
green of beatrice's mantle. down the narrow road goats were passing,
followed by a sunburnt girl with a barge-like wooden shoe at the end of
each of her bare brown legs. the pure, life-giving air that entered by the
window made the blood glow with a better warmth than that of sparkling
wine. i soon went outside to see something of the place which i had entered
in the darkness.

i found that the village was built partly in the bottom of the gorge and
partly on one of its craggy sides. closely hemmed in by rocks and high
hills overgrown with forest was a bright and fertile little valley, with
abundance of pear and walnut trees, luxuriant cottage-gardens, and little
fields by the flashing torrent, where shocks of lately-cut buckwheat stood
with their heads together waiting for the warm september hours to ripen
their black grain.

many of the houses were half hidden in leafy bowers. i threaded my way
between these towards some ivy-draped fragments of an ancient priory upon a
mass of rock much overgrown with brambles glistening with blackberries
and briars decked with coral-red hips. before descending to the road and
beginning the day's journey i indulged for a little while the musing mood
of the solitary wanderer in the grassy burying-ground on the edge of the
cliff.

i started for bort ere the intensely blue sky began to pale before the
increasing brilliancy of the sun. the road ran along the bottom of the deep
valley, where there was change of scene with every curve of the dordogne. a
field of maize showed how different was the climate here from that of the
bleak plateau above the deep rift in the rocks. i stopped beside a little
runnel that came down from the wooded heights to pick some flowers of
yellow balsam, and while there my eye fell upon a splendid green lizard
basking in the sun. here was another proof of the warm temperature of the
valley, notwithstanding its altitude. as i went on i skirted long fields of
buckwheat upon the slope, but reaching only a little way upwards. the white
waxen flowers had turned, or were turning, rusty; but what a variety of
beautiful colour was on the stems and leaves! greens and yellows passed
into carmine, purple, and burnt sienna. a field of ripening buckwheat has a
charm of warm colour that gladdens the eye, especially when the morning or
evening sunshine is upon it. but this glow of many tints was a sure sign
of approaching autumn; so, too, were the reddened stalks of persicaria,
filling the dry ditches by the wayside.

the valley narrowed, and upon its rocky sides was many a patch of purple
heather--little gardens for the wild bees, but not for man. neither peasant
nor local nimrod ever sets his foot there. still higher, the outlines of
the topmost crags were drawn hard against the sky, for there was no vapour
in the air. verily, the ground seemed quite alive with brown lizards
darting along at my approach and raising little clouds of dust, whilst
blue-winged grasshoppers--which, perhaps, would be more correctly described
as locusts--crossed and recrossed the road in one flight. in the midst of
such beautiful scenery, and with such happy creatures for companions, i
felt no wish to hurry. moreover, the blackberries sometimes tempted me to
loiter. if they are unwholesome, as french peasants often maintain, i
ought to have been dead long ago. strange that this prejudice should be
so general in france with regard to the fruit of so harmless a tribe. but
these same peasants gather the leaves of the bramble to make a decoction
for sore throat. i passed a cottage that had a vine-trellis, the first i
had seen on this side of the auvergne mountains, and it was half surrounded
by a forest of beans in full flower on very high sticks. in a sunny space
was a row of thatched beehives.

after walking some eight miles, i was not unwilling to take advantage of
a village inn. here i had a meal of bacon and eggs, haricots, cheese and
walnuts, with some rather rough limousin wine. i soon became aware that
there was something amiss in the rustic auberge, and catching a dim glimpse
of a figure lying in a bed in a small room adjoining, i asked the young
woman who waited upon me if anybody was ill there. 'yes,' she replied
dolefully. then i learnt from her that her father, struck with apoplexy,
was lying in a state that was hopeless. there is no escaping the
mournfulness of life. when our minds are least clouded the shadow of death
suddenly stands between us and the sunshine. i was in no mood to linger at
the table.

what a relief to be out again in the sunshine and the light air, to see
the dordogne flashing through meadows where women were haymaking with bare
feet!

it was early in the afternoon when i entered the small but active town of
bort. the burg is only interesting by its exceedingly picturesque situation
on the right bank of the dordogne, under a very high hill, capped by a
basaltic table, which is flanked towards the town, or rather a little to
the south of it, by a long row of stupendous columns of basalt, known as
the _orgues de bort_, from their resemblance at a distance to organ-pipes.
the basalt here is of a reddish yellow. the table, with its igneous
crystallizations, lies upon the metamorphic rock.

i decided to climb to the summit of the prodigious organ-pipes, and to look
at the world from that remarkable point of view. for the greater part of
the distance the way lay up a tiresome winding road on the side of the
hill. a woman, who was tying buckwheat into sheaves, said the distance was
'three small quarters of an hour.' it would have been simpler arithmetic to
have said 'half an hour,' but the peasant thinks it safer not to be
more explicit than he or she can help. experience has taught me that
'three-quarters of an hour,' whether they are called little or not, mean an
hour or more, and that 'five quarters of an hour' mean an hour and a half,
or even two hours. i passed a team of bullocks descending from the moor
with loads of dry broom for the bakers, headed by a little old man in a
great felt hat, with a long goad in his hand, with which he tickled up the
yoked beasts occasionally, not because they needed it, but from force of
habit. this goad, by-the-bye, is a slender stick about six feet long, with
a short nail at one end, so fastened that the point is turned outwards.
a bullock is not goaded from behind, but from the front between the
shoulder-blades, and it generally suffices for the animal to see a man in
front of him with a stick. instead of drawing back, as might be supposed,
he steps forward at his best pace. cows and bulls are harnessed, to the
wain and plough as well as oxen; they have all to work for their living.
english cattle are allowed to grow fat in idleness, and their troubles do
not begin until the time comes for them to be eaten. it is otherwise in
france.

on the banks were fragrant, mauve-coloured pinks, with ragged petals; but
at the foot of the _orgues_ was a rocky waste, where little grew besides
the sombre holly and fetid hellebore.

the view from the top of the cliff made me fully realize the wildness, the
sterility, the desolation of nature in this region. beyond the valley far
beneath me where the dordogne lay, a glittering thread, was the department
of the cantal. the whole southern and eastern prospect was broken up by
innumerable savage, heath-covered or rocky hills, with little green valleys
or dense woods filling the hollows, the southern horizon being closed by
the wavy blue line of the cantal mountains. to the north-east the sky-line
was marked by the mont-dore range, with the highest peak of auvergne, the
puy de sancy, clearly visible against the lighter blue of the cloudless
air. the feeling that prevailed throughout this wide expanse of country was
solemn sternness.

i returned to bort, and as there were still about two hours of light left,
i crossed the river and went in search of the cascades, two or three
miles from the town, formed by the rue in its wild impatience to meet the
dordogne. when i was skirting the buckwheat fields of the valley in the
calm open country, there was a sweet and tender glow of evening sunshine
upon the purple-tinted sheaves standing with their heads together. the
titan-strewn rocks felt it likewise with all their heather and broom. there
was no husbandman in the plain, no song of the solitary goat-girl, no creak
of the plough, no twitter even of a bird. it was not yet the hour when
virgil says every field is silent, but the repose of nature had commenced.

the dusk was falling when i reached a silk-mill by the side of the rue,
and passed up the deep gorge full of shadows, led by the sound of roaring
waters. a narrow path winding under high rocks of porphyritic gneiss
brought me to the cascade called the saut de la saule, where the river,
divided into two branches by a vast block, leaps fifteen or twenty feet
into a deep basin to whirl and boil with fury, then dashes onward down the
stony channel, to leap again into the air and fall into another basin.

[illustration: the valley of the rue.]

i reached a rock in the channel by means of a tree that had been laid
between it and the bank, and stood in the midst of the seething, broken
torrent, from which arose that saddening odour which water in wild
commotion gives forth when daylight is dying and the darkened trees stand
like mourning plumes. on either hand the forest-covered sides of the ravine
and their savage crags seemed to reach higher as they grew darker. where
was i? there was a tree hard by that looked very like the infernal elm
beneath whose leaves the vain dreams cluster; but it was probably an oak.




across the moors of the correze.


the night being passed at bort, the next morning i continued my journey by
the dordogne. again the sky was cloudless. i kept on the right bank of the
river--the limousin side, leaving the cantal to some future day, that may
never come. a little beyond the spot where the dordogne and the rue met
and embraced uproariously, the path entered a narrow lane bordered by tall
hedges chiefly of hazel and briar overclimbed by wild clematis--well termed
the traveller's joy, for it is a beautiful plant that reminds many a
wanderer of his far-away home.

[illustration: a woman of the correze.]

then i passed under precipitous naked rocks, with the river on the other
hand, skirted by low bushes of twiggy willow that looked like tamarisk from
a distance. the sun was now hot, and the ground was again all astir with
lizards. looking upon the path just in front of me, i brought myself to a
sudden stop. had i advanced a step or two more i could hardly have failed
to tread upon a serpent that lay dozing in the sun just in my way. i was
glad that i did not do so, for i recognised it, by its olive skin with
reddish patches, as the dreaded _aspic_, or red viper. there it lay
stretched out its full length, about a foot and a half, either asleep or
enjoying the morning sun so much that it was in no humour to move. i do
not kill snakes indiscriminately, like the peasants whenever they get the
chance, but this one being dangerous, i resolved that it should never
take another sun-bath. after being roused by a blow, the creature did not
attempt to run, but did battle bravely, fiercely striking at the stick.

the path i had been following with so much confidence dwindled away and was
lost. again the gorge became a deep rift in the rocks, which left no margin
on which one could walk. the only way to follow the windings of the stream
would have been to wade or swim. once more i had to own myself beaten
by natural obstacles. the dordogne is a river that cannot be followed
throughout its savage wildernesses, except perhaps in a light flat-bottomed
boat, and then not without serious difficulties. anglers might have
splendid sport here until they broke their necks, for the trout abound
where the shadow of a man seldom or never falls. in the neighbourhood of
towns and large villages the fishing is often spoilt by the casting-net.

having realized the situation, i turned my back to the stream and commenced
climbing the steep side of the gorge, choosing a spot where it was well
wooded, for the sake of the foothold. for some distance the ground was
green with moss and wood-sorrel; but the tug-of-war came when the vast
banks of loose stones--hot, bare, and shale-like--were reached. on gaining
the plateau, i threw myself down upon the heather and looked at the scene
below. the mingling of rock, forest, and stream was superbly desolate. even
the naked steeps of slate-coloured broken stone had an impressive grandeur
of their own.

leaving the dordogne with the intention of cutting off a wide bend and
meeting it again the next day or the day after, i struck across the
half-cultivated open country, hoping soon to find a village; for i had
spent much time in the gorge and made very little progress, while the sun
had moved nearly up to the centre of his arc. the rays fell fiercely,
and there was no shade upon the plateau. there was a road, but it was
abominable. only tramps understand the luxury of-walking upon a good road.

i came to a hamlet that looked very miserable. the daily toil had scattered
the men afield, and only a few women were to be seen. not one of them wore
a stocking, nor even a wooden shoe. some to whom i spoke did not understand
me; those who understood told me that there was no inn in the place--that
there was no one who could give me a meal. one of them must have thought
that i was begging my way, or was exceedingly hard up, for she said: 'ah!
mon pauvre ami, vous etes dans un malheureux pays.'

continuing, i came to a village which was not shown on my map. here i
learnt there was a single auberge, which was also the tobacco shop and
grocery of the place. it was kept by an old man who lived alone. this
inn was a cottage without any sign over it. i tried the door, but it was
locked, and nobody responded to the noise i made. it took me half an hour
to find the solitary at the farther end of the village. he returned with
me, and, opening the door, we both entered the only room of the cottage. it
was shop, bedroom, and kitchen. there was a bed against the wall, and near
the window was a small stock of tobacco, snuff, and groceries all mixed up.
my host's back was much bent and his face deeply furrowed. he wore a shirt
with a high collar, and a blue waistcoat. he was an honest, kindly man,
and seemed to take pleasure in doing what he could for me apart from the
thought of gaining by it.

in the way of food he had only eggs, bread, cheese, and butter. it was
decided that he should fry some eggs. he lighted some sticks upon the
hearth, and there was soon a good blaze; then he laid his great frying-pan
upon it, resting the long handle upon a chair. while the butter was
melting, he opened a trap-door in the floor and went down a ladder into his
cellar. presently he reappeared with a litre of wine, and having set
this before me, he proceeded to crack the eggs and empty them into the
frying-pan. as a cook he had no pretensions, but he knew how to fry eggs.
when my meal was ready, and he had placed everything before me upon the
bare board, he sat at a little distance eating a dry old crust with a piece
of goat cheese. this was his lunch. i insisted upon his sharing the wine
with me, and this little attention made him thoroughly confiding and
cheery.

he was left a widower, he told me, with four children, at the age of
thirty-eight, and he would not take a second wife because, his father
having done so, he remembered the trials and tribulations of his own
childhood which came of his having 'a mother who was not a mother.' he said
to himself, 'my children shall not run the risk of going through what i
went through.' he toiled on alone, brought up his family himself, added
to his bit of land in course of years, and acquired other property. his
children were now all settled in life, and he had given them everything he
had except the cottage in which he lived. i was struck by the strong virtue
of this illiterate peasant, who had evidently no notion of his own value,
and who would not have told the simple story of his life passed amidst the
moors of the correze had i not drawn it from him.

[illustration: a peasant of the moors.]

as i watched the old man, prematurely bent by labour, eating his hard
crust, cheerful and contented, after giving to others the fruit of his many
years of toil, i thought, 'if man were nothing but an animal, such a life
would be not only absurd, but impossible.' another glass of wine made my
host and cook still more talkative. he told me that not long ago he had
walked from this village to tulle, distant about thirty-five miles, to
see a soldier son who was to pass through the place with his regiment. he
started at three in the morning and arrived at five in the afternoon, but
was only able to exchange a few words with his son. they could not even
'break a crust' together. the old man then turned his face towards his
village, and walked the whole night.

'i hope your son would walk as far to see you,' i said, with a little
scepticism in my mind.

this is what he replied, almost word for word:

'ah! children do not do for their parents what their parents do for them.
the commandment says, 'honour your father and your mother'--not honour your
children. nevertheless, it is the parents who deny themselves the most. as
soon as your children are married they generally forget you.

perhaps if i had married again i should be happier now. all the same, i
am contented. i can keep myself. when i am no longer able to take care of
myself, my children must do something for me.'

i confess that i was sorry when the time came for me to leave this old man,
knowing well that i should never see again his rugged face and his kind
eyes twinkling under their shaggy brows. perhaps he, too, had some such
regret, for we had had a long talk, and he may have tired out all his other
listeners, especially those of his own family. when a man has grown old
and is near the end, it would often be better for him to go out into the
wilderness and talk to the rocks and trees than to repeat the stories of
his life upon his own hearth-stone. before i left the peasant fetched a
bottle, which he only brought out on rare occasions, and insisted upon my
drinking a parting glass with him.

i passed through another hamlet where there was a high wooden cross. there
were walnut-trees, and men were knocking down the nuts. the women here wore
wide-brimmed black straw hats over white caps. i soon left these figures
behind, and was alone in a birch-wood, where there were many yellow leaves
between me and the blue sky. then i met the road to neuvic, and following
it came to the artaud, a tributary of the dordogne, threading its way
through deep ravines, amidst wild rocks, dark woods, and bracken-covered
steeps. the road crossed the ravine upon a bridge of three arches.

the scene was one to raise the mind above common things. the stream rushed
madly down the rocky chasm with a mighty roar, now losing itself in the
leafy vaults of overhanging trees, now reappearing like a torrent of fire
where the glorious lustre of the september sun struck it and mingled with
it.

as i ascended the opposite hill a still deeper ravine came into view,
wooded down to the water and all in dark shadow, except a rocky ridge
facing the sinking sun and bathed in warm light.

when the top of the hill had been reached, an old man, who wore a large and
very weather-beaten felt hat, was sitting on the step of a wayside cross
with a flock of geese feeding around him. next i passed a bare-footed
_cantonnier_ breaking stones, and he told me that if i made
haste i might reach neuvic before dark. on the outskirts of a
village--roche-le-peyroux--a wandering tinker and his boy were at work
by the side of the road with fire and bellows, and i felt a trampish or
romantic desire to stay with them awhile in the cheerful glow; but thinking
of the coming night, i smothered the impulse.

upon the moor which i was now traversing was a very old stone cross, upon
which the figure of the saviour was rudely carved in relief. the form was
so uncouth as to be scarcely human. the head was half as wide again as the
space across the shoulders, and the hands were nearly as large as the head.
how many centuries ago did christian piety raise this rough image of its
hope upon the moors amidst the purple heather and the yellow broom?

the road crossed another stream not far from the spot where it fell into
the dordogne. there was a wooded quietude here, with an odour of fresh
grass and water that enticed me to linger; but the evening light in the
tops of the trees and the twittering of the birds settling amongst the
leaves for the night spurred me on. i had walked many miles since the
morning, but had made very little way according to the map, so full of
deception is this wild limousin country to the wanderer who does not know
it. i had still some eight miles to walk before reaching neuvic.

there was a little mill at the bottom of the grassy valley, but it seemed
deserted by all living creatures save a dog. this rather large and shaggy
animal seized the rare opportunity that was now offered him for a little
excitement. not satisfied with barking at me furiously from his own ground,
he followed me about a mile up the hill i had now to climb, but without
venturing very near. at length i thought i had had enough of his company,
so at the next bend in the road i came to a stand beside a heap of stones
that a _cantonnier_ had neatly piled up in geometrical pattern. there i
waited, and the animal came on gaily, little expecting to find himself
suddenly at close quarters with me. just as he turned the corner he raised
a howl that said he was both surprised and shocked. skipping with great
agility, he avoided the next stone, and the expression of his face told me
that he was already feeling very home-sick. he turned tail as quick as he
could, and used very bad dog-language as the stones followed him down the
hill. as a rule, dogs lose all their courage when they are out of sight of
their own homes, unless someone whom they know well is near at hand to give
them confidence in themselves.

i am again upon the moor. there is a deep silence over the heather, for the
last bees have left the pink and purple bells. but there is still a wan
glow in the air, which gives a sad beauty to the quiet, mournful land. a
boy is returning with some cattle after spending the day upon the heath,
and he sings as he thinks of his poor home, the blazing sticks on the
hearth, the soup, the buckwheat cake, or the potatoes. through a mask of
silver birches i see a solemn ruddy light as of a funeral-torch in the far
western sky. the breath of evening is made sweeter by the odour wafted from
some distant fresh-cut grass or broom that has been drying in the september
sun. a field-cricket, waking up, breaks the silence with its shrill cry
that is quickly taken up by others near at hand and far away in the dusk.
the light and colour of the day are now gone, but there is one beautiful
star flashing in front of me like a lamp of the sanctuary when the vaulted
minster is filled with shadow.

the rest of the walk to neuvic was by night. the first auberge i entered in
this small town of some three thousand inhabitants was a little too rough
even for me. the family were at dinner, or at supper, as they would say,
eating upon the bare board, without plates, potatoes boiled in their skins.
i do not doubt there were hollows cut in the table to serve instead of
plates, for this primitive contrivance still lingers in the wildest parts
of the limousin. in answer to my inquiry as to bed accommodation, i was
told that i should have to sleep in the same room with others, probably the
whole family. i had sufficient taste for civilization left to decline the
proposed arrangement, and went in search of another inn.

happily there was one, and of a better sort. it was thoroughly rustic, but
there was not the squalor i had just encountered. in the kitchen, paved
with small pebbles, two months' accumulation of used linen had been pressed
down in an old wine-cask, and boiling water was now being poured upon it
through a cloth covered with a layer of wood ashes. in these rural places
the washing-day is usually once in two or three months. this simplifies
matters, but it needs a considerable stock of linen, which, by-the-bye,
peasants generally possess. the wash-house odour that arose from the
_lessive_ was not grateful, but i tried to accommodate myself to it. on the
floor was a baby swaddled up, and tightly fitted into a small wooden cradle
on huge rockers--a cradle that might have served for scores of babies,
and been none the worse for wear. although the fire on the hearth looked
tempting, the proximity of the wine-cask and the linen that was being
purified with potash made me glad to hear that my meal would be served in
another room.

considering the region, the dinner was not a bad one. i had soup, veal,
eggs, and a fair wine. i had also a companion, but would rather have been
without him. he was a young man, whose appearance gained by the contrast of
a dusty wayfarer's, and he gave himself airs accordingly. i set him down as
a petty functionary of the place, and a _pensionnaire_ of the auberge.
all the time i was with him his mind was exceedingly restless as to my
intentions and business in those parts, and such explanations as i gave
him to appease his insatiable curiosity and awkwardly-veiled suspicion
evidently left him unsatisfied.

the next morning the hostess brought out her police register for me to
enter my name, nationality, age, profession, destination, etc. i had no
doubt that my acquaintance of the night before had reminded her of this
little formality in order that he might afterwards see what i had written.
all innkeepers in france are liable to a fine if they do not make every
traveller who passes the night with them leave this record of himself for
inspection, but the formality is much more often omitted than observed. i
have not been able to overcome my english dislike of the practice, which
is annoying and useless, like much more that belongs to the french
administrative system.

by daylight i found neuvic to be a cheerful, pleasant little town, with
a venerable-looking old church, apparently of the twelfth century. it is
entered by a cavernous portal under a very massive low tower, but the
interior shows little of interest. what struck me, however, as something
quite uncommon was a small altar in the centre of the nave just below the
sanctuary. upon it was an image of the virgin, which a boy told me had been
found in a neighbouring wood about a century ago.

on leaving neuvic i noticed a woman carrying to the baker's a large dish
of edible _boleti_, known to the french as _cepes_. this excellent fungus
during the late summer and autumn is a very important article of food in
france wherever there are extensive chestnut-woods. the orange mushroom is
also much eaten in the same regions, for it likewise loves the chestnut
forest; but it may be mistaken by those who do not know the signs for
its relative, the crimson-capped fly-agaric, one of the most deadly of
cryptogams.

after seeing the dish of _cepes_, i was not surprised to find many
chestnut-trees along the road that i now took to st. pantaleon. the country
was less barren than that which i had passed over the day before. although
there was much heather, broom and furze, trees and pasture broke the
monotony of the moorland. here was the better limousin landscape--every
knoll and mamelon covered with heather and other moor-plants, woods and
meadows in the dells and dips. the numerous clumps of silver birches, and
the gorse arrayed in its new flowers of bright gold, added to the charm of
the sunlit scene.


to me the weather was all the more delightful by being very warm, for i had
run away from winter on the auvergne mountains. the whirring noise of the
grasshoppers as they flew across the road, and the tremulous sheen of
their wings, coloured like blooming lavender, brought back to me the best
recollections of other wayfaring days in the warm south, when all these
things were new, and the sight feasted upon them with the eagerness of bees
that suck the first flowers of spring.

i passed a little field of buckwheat that had been cut some days and had
fully ripened. a woman was threshing out the grain with a flail upon a
spread canvas, surrounded by a circle of purple-tinted cones, the sheaves
leaning together. now the wide level moor returned, but nature was not
quite the same here as she had been before. the vast expanse was dotted
over with dark little juniper bushes. these were covered with berries which
nobody seemed to think worth the picking. rock-cist flourished, starring
the turf all over with its yellow discs. this moor was an absolute desert.

long i walked without seeing another human being. at length i met a woman
carrying a distaff, and tried to get into conversation with her, but it was
impossible; she could not speak a word of french, and i knew nothing of her
limousin patois.

by steadfastly following the road, i came to the village of st. pantaleon,
on the brow of a hill overlooking the luxege, and stopped at a wayside inn.
it was a poor auberge; but there was an air of reaching toward some ideal
of superior life and softened manners that made itself felt in small
ways not to be described with any certainty, but none the less real. the
innkeeper, who was also a peasant-farmer, possessed the doubtful blessing
of a mind that rose above what the logic of his existence, sternly bound
to a plot of grudging soil and the petty needs of still poorer neighbours,
demanded of it. he was blessed or afflicted with that hunger of knowledge
and refinement which lifts and casts down, rejoices and saddens. he knew
that such ambition with regard to himself was vain, that it was his destiny
to live out his days on the edge of a moor in the correze, and that it was
his duty to thank heaven that he was sheltered and had sufficient food,
fuel, and clothing for himself and his family: all this he knew, and he
accepted his lot bravely. but the fire was only damped down; it glowed
in its hidden heart, and strove for a vent. it was not lighted without a
purpose. the peasant had a son, to whom the flame had been passed on; for
he aimed at the priesthood. this has ever been a refuge of ambitious minds
that cannot rise by any other means above the dullness of the peasant's
life, which is the more endurable the more the man is able to place himself
upon the animal level of his plodding ox. the son was being educated in a
seminary, but he was now home for the holidays. presently he appeared. he
was a youth of about nineteen, wearing a blouse like any other peasant.
there was certainly nothing in his appearance to indicate that he
was destined for the cure of souls. the proud father said: 'he is in
philosophy.' the young man had a twinkle in his eye that might have been
philosophical. neither of them had a suspicion of the vanity concealed in
the high-sounding phrase.

but i am forgetting to say anything about what was more important to me
than aught else at that time. i had to eat and drink in order to look at
nature with an admiring eye, note the interwoven aims and motives and
troubled duties of human life; to be 'in philosophy' after my own humble
fashion. my meal was chiefly of fried eggs and ham, the latter nearly as
hard as leather. i ate in a small room where there was a bed with a red
curtain. no knife was given me, for in these out-of-the-way inns you are
expected to carry your knife in your pocket, which a century ago was the
case in most of the french hostelries. in the remotely rural districts the
ways of life have changed very slightly in a hundred years. but, if
the knife was overlooked, the white napkin and small tablecloth were
remembered. while talking with the _aubergiste_ over the coffee--there was
really some coffee here that was not made either from acorns or beans--he
told me, as an example of the low rate of wages in the district, that a
road--mender, who worked in all weathers, was paid forty francs a month.
in the whole commune there were only two or three persons who had wine in
their houses. he lent me his two sons--the _seminariste_ and his young
brother--to walk with me as far as the luxege, and put me on the path to la
page, at which village i proposed to pass the night.

as we left, a grand expanse of chestnut forest came into view, following
the hills that bordered the curved line of the luxege. the little river,
like all the tributaries of the upper dordogne, runs at the bottom of a
deep gorge. standing upon the brink of it, i perceived that i was about
to enter another sylvan solitude of enchanting beauty. the dense forest
descended the abrupt escarpments to the channel and hid the stream, and
over the leafy masses was that play of sunshine, shadow, and thin vapour
which i had so often watched in a dreamily joyous mood lying at the foot of
some pine in the vosges.

about half-way down the gorge was a ruinous romanesque chapel upon a rock,
the polygonal apse being on the very edge of a precipice. at each exterior
angle of the imperfect polygon was a column with a cubiform capital. the
interior was all dilapidated; the floor of the sanctuary had fallen in, but
the altar-stone--a block of granite--remained in its place. this chapel
belonged to a priory. little is left of the adjoining monastery except some
subterranean vaults and the gaping oven of the ruined bakery; all ferny,
mossy, given up to the faun and the dryad. the upper masonry was carried
away years ago to build a chapel upon the hill. a bit of green slope, where
the sunbeams wantoned with yellow mulleins, wild carrot, and bracken, was
the cemetery, as a few stone crosses almost buried in the soil plainly
told. these crosses doubtless mark the graves of nameless priors. and the
dust of the humble monk and serving brother, where is that? every plant
draws from it something that it needs to fulfil its purpose. it is as good
for the nightshade as for the violet; flowers that are rank and deadly, and
others that are sweet and innocent, strive for the right of clasping with
their hungry roots the dust of men.

the innkeeper's sons left me by an abandoned mill on the other side of the
stream, which was crossed by a rough wooden bridge. ascending the opposite
hill by a narrow path in the shadow of chestnuts and beeches, and fringed
with gorse and heather, i passed another deserted house, the roof of which
had fallen in. the gorge was getting very shadowy when i reached the
tableland above it. i saw the small town of laplau in the plain away to
the left, but my path did not lie through it, for i preferred the wilder
country towards la page. when i passed a little lake in a hollow, half
surrounded by firs, the slanting rays were diving into its liquid
stillness, over which the motionless trees bent gazing at their likeness.

when the sun left me i was upon a hilly waste, amid darkening bushes
of holly and juniper, tall bracken, heather, and gorse. the spirit of
desolation threw out broad wings under the fading sky; but from afar
towards the west, whither i was going, came through the dusk the shine and
twinkle of many fires that had been lighted by the peasants upon their
patches of reclaimed desert. they flashed to me the sentiment of the autumn
fields, of hopeful husbandry, of laying up for the winter, and preparation
for harvests that would be gathered under next year's sun.

tired and hungry, i reached la page in the darkness. the village looked
very poor and dreary; but i had been told that it contained a 'good hotel,'
and i set about looking for it. it turned out to be a rather large but
exceedingly rough auberge. on opening the door i saw a great kitchen with
pebbled floor, lighted only by the glow of embers on the hearth. the figure
of a woman standing in the chimney opening was lit up by the glare. i
walked towards her, and asked her if she could give me lodging. after
scanning me very acutely for some seconds, she replied, 'yes.' she was
puzzled, if not startled, by the apparition in front of her; but having
thrown down my pack and taken a seat in the chimney-corner like a familiar
of the house, i talked to her about the comfort of being in such a place
after a long walk in so wild a district as hers, and succeeded in making
her quite genial. she was the mayor's wife, but she was not too proud to
cook for me after lighting a flickering oil-lamp. while i was waiting for
my meal peasants came in, and had theirs at the bare tables, of which there
were several in the great kitchen. their soup was ladled out from the
immense black pot that hung over the fire, and the noise they made as
they fell to it was very grating to the nerves. but the wanderer in the
chimney-corner had no business to be there, unless he was prepared to
accept all that was customary without wincing. my own dinner commenced with
some of this soup, which was like hot dishwater with slices of bread thrown
into it. the bit of boiled veal that followed was an improvement, although
anything but a captivating dish. goat-cheese, hard and salt, and with a
flavour that left no doubt as to the source from which it came, made up the
frugal fare. i returned to the chimney-corner and smoked in silence, now
peering up the sooty cavern where the wind moaned, and now watching the
clear-obscure effects of the dimly-lighted room. presently a trap stopped
outside, and in walked the aubergiste, accompanied by a sprightly little
man who i afterwards learnt was a pedlar.

monsieur le maire was not exactly a polished gentleman; he took no notice
of me after the first searching glance. he made an unpleasant impression,
but this wore off when i found that he was a well-meaning man, who had not
cultivated fine manners. why should he have cultivated what would have been
of little or no use to him? these rural functionaries are just like the
people with whom they live. the young _seminariste_ told me an amusing
story of a mayor of st. pantaleon, who had had a very narrow escape of
being caught by gendarmes when upon a poaching expedition. '_tout le monde
est braconnier ici_,' added my informant with a sincerity that was very
pleasing. of course, he was a poacher himself when reposing from his
theological and philosophical studies. i thought none the worse of him for
that. after all, poaching in france generally means nothing more immoral
than neglecting to take out a gun license, and to respect the president's
decrees with regard to the months that are open and those that are not.

on my way to bed i saw in a corner of the staircase a spinning-wheel of the
pattern known throughout europe. i was told that it had not been used
for many years. the distaff and spindle which are to be seen on egyptian
monuments are still employed by thousands of french, peasant-women, but the
wheel invented in the sixteenth century is rarely used now, unless it be by
martha in the opera.

the next morning i made friends with the pedlar, who was about to start
upon my road, and who offered to give me a lift in his trap as far as la
roche canillac. meanwhile, he had unpacked all his samples of cloth with a
view to doing a little business with the mayor. this personage, however,
was not allowed to have much voice in the matter; it was his spouse who
represented his interests in the bargaining battle that was now waged with
deafening din and much apparent ferocity for three-quarters of an hour. the
little pedlar was used to this kind of thing, and was quite prepared for
the fray. when the lady offered him, after much depreciatory fingering of
the chosen material, two-thirds of what he asked for the stuff that was to
be made into a pair of winter trousers for the mayor, he spun round and
jumped like a peg-top just escaped from the string. then he raged and
swore, said he was being mocked at, dabbed his hat on his head, and made a
pretence of gathering up his samples and rushing off. the mayor watched the
scene with a quiet smirk on his face: he knew that he would somehow get the
trousers. i have no doubt that he did have them, but i walked out instead
of waiting to see the end of the battle. when i returned, the haggling was
over, the hostess and the pedlar were on the most affable terms, and there
was not a sign of the recent storm.

presently the pedlar, myself, and the innkeeper's son--a young man who had
received his education elsewhere, and had learnt much that did not chime
in with his present surroundings--were in a light cart, drawn by a lively
horse, speeding along the road over the moors. here and there, near the
village, were small fields of buckwheat in the midst of the heather and
bracken. my companions explained that each commune was surrounded by a
considerable extent of moorland that belonged to it, and that any native of
the commune had the right of selecting a piece, which became his absolute
property after he had cleared it and brought it under cultivation; thus
anyone could have what land he wanted in reason for nothing. quite an
arcadian state of things this, were not the conditions of nature such as to
chill the ambition to acquire such freeholds. three years of back-breaking
labour are needed before the land is fit to be put to some profitable
purpose. and then what does it yield? buckwheat, and perhaps potatoes.
although the peasants have the faculty of extending their landed property
in the manner described, the consideration of means generally stands in the
way. they cannot afford to work and wait three years. their existence is
truly wretched, and if it were not for the luxuriant chestnut-woods, which
cover the sides of the narrow valleys or gorges with which the barren
plateau is deeply seamed every few miles, the population of the region
would be more scanty than it is, for the chestnut goes far to sustain the
people through the worst months of the year.

the plough used upon these moors, on the _causses_ of the quercy, and
in some other districts where the barrenness of the soil has kept the
inhabitants for centuries imprisoned within the circle of their old
routine, is one of the simplest that the world has known. it differs but
slightly from the one figured in the most ancient of egyptian hieroglyphs,
and is really the same as that which was used in gaul under the romans.
indeed, it has not the improvements that the romans introduced. two poles
forming an obtuse angle is the rough shape of it. the wedge-like share is
a continuation of the pole that is held by the ploughman. often on the
_causses_, where loose stones are inseparably mixed with the soil, the
entire plough is of wood.

[illustration: ploughing the moor.]

we passed through the village of marcillac, near the head of one of the
valleys. the soil was much more fertile here, and a maize field was a sign
that the climate was warmer. there were, moreover, pleasant gardens with
fruit-trees and flowers. oleanders were blooming outside some of the
houses. but we had no sooner risen upon the plateau again than the moor
returned, and for seven or eight miles it continued unbroken. the ground
was slightly undulating, and amongst the gorse and heather were scattered
innumerable juniper bushes.

on approaching la roche canillac the road descended into a very deep valley
by so many turns and windings that i was thankful to be in the pedlar's
cart, especially as the mid-day sun smote with torrid strength. but the
scenery was of exquisite beauty, and this valley will remain in my memory
as one of the most charming i have ever seen. luxuriant woods, flashing
water, savage rocks, emerald-green patches of meadow, little mills by the
riverside--i should add nothing to the picture by saying more. upon the
rocky hillside was the burg of five hundred inhabitants. my companions
took me to an old auberge whose exterior was not promising, but which was,
nevertheless, well supplied with food, and had a good cellar. the meal
served there was the best that had fallen to my lot for several days. the
sun had lost all the ardour of mid-day when i took leave of the pedlar
and the mayor's son. i went away thinking that i might travel far without
finding two more kindly, honest fellows.

[illustration: a gorge in the correze.]

i had hoped to reach argentat by the dordogne that night, but i had stayed
too long at the inn for the plan to be practicable; so i set off down the
gorge of the tributary with the intention of taking my luck at a village
called st. bazile. i was soon in the shade of the chestnut forest, where
boars were said to be plentiful. as time went on, the scenery became
more solemn and awe-inspiring. pines that looked very gloomy in the late
afternoon mingled with the chestnuts, while black rocks, faintly flushed
with heather towards the sky, reared their jagged outlines above the sombre
foliage. all the while the water in the gorge moaned or roared. it was
growing very dusk when the walls on either hand rose like the sides of a
pit.

i was beginning to ask myself in no cheerful mood whether the map had not
deceived me as to the whereabouts of st. bazile, when, to my relief, i
heard a church bell ringing not very far down the stream. it was the
angelus. how often has this clear, solemn, heart-touching, and consoling
sound been to me what a familiar beacon is to the doubting mariner! only
wanderers in desolate places know the sentiment that it carries through the
evening air. more welcome than ever before did it seem in this black gorge.
i pushed on, and presently the gloomy walls widened out. turning a bend
of the torrent, i stood in a glow of ruddy light that streamed from the
yawning mouth of an open-air oven that had recently been filled with dry
broom and kindled for the night's baking. here was a fresh delight, for
there is nothing more cheering, more full of homely sentiment in the dusk,
than the view of such a blazing oven.

this, then, was the village of st. bazile de la roche, to give its full
name. it could scarcely have boasted a hundred houses. there was one
miserable little inn, kept by a widow. there i had to pass the night,
unless i preferred a cave or a mossy bed under a tree. the poor woman
managed to find a piece of veal, which she cooked for me. it seemed to be
my lot now to eat no meat but veal. as i sat down to this dish and a bottle
of wine, two men at another table were eating boiled potatoes, without
plates, and drinking water. the contrast made me uncomfortable. there is
some reason in the selfishness that avoids the sights and sounds and all
suggestions of other people's poverty and pain; but those who take such
base care of themselves never know human life. i could not offer these
men wine without running the risk of a refusal, but it was different with
regard to a little hump-backed postman who came in to gossip. half a litre
of wine that, at my wish, was set before him made him exceedingly cheerful.
he told me that he walked about twenty miles a day on the hillsides and
in the ravines, and i suppose his pay was the same as that of other rural
postmen in france--from l28 to l32 a year. the inhabitants of st. bazile,
he said, were all very poor, their chief food being potatoes and chestnuts.
before the vines a little further down the valley were destroyed by the
phylloxera and mildew, the people were much better off. then there was
plenty of wine in the cellars, but now st. bazile was a village of
water-drinkers. he spoke of the neighbouring parish of servieres, where,
at the annual pilgrimage, women go barefoot from one rock to the other on
which the chapel stands.

before placing myself between the canvas-like sheets, i opened the lattice
window of my meagrely-furnished room. the only distinguishable voice of the
night was that of the stream quarrelling with its rocky bed just below.
before me was the high black wall of hill and forest, above the ragged line
of which flashed the swarming stars.

the angelus sounded again at four in the morning. before seven i was out in
the open air. i saw the cure go up into the tower of his small church,
and ring the bell for his own mass. he was probably too poor to pay a
sacristan. a little later he was in the pulpit catechising the children,
and preaching to the older parishioners between whiles. a boy and then a
girl would stand up, and in answer to questions put to them would recite in
an unintelligible gabble the catechism they had learnt. if one of them lost
the thread and suddenly lapsed into a speechless confusion of ideas, the
cure pointed the finger of reprobation at the unfortunate little wretch,
and made him or her--especially him--feel the enormity of having a bad
memory. while waving his arm in a moment of rhetorical excitement, he let
his book fall upon an old woman's head. '_voila ce que c'est de faire
des gestes!_' said he with a smile that was almost a discreet grin. the
children were delighted, and everybody laughed, including the poor old
soul, who had seated herself under the pulpit so that she might hear well.

it was evident that the people of st. bazile quite understood their cure,
and that he was just the one for them. he was a strong man, over sixty
years of age, and he spoke with a rich southern accent. under his
sacerdotal earnestness there was a sense of humour ever ready to take a
little revenge for a life of sacrifice. there are many such priests in
france.

i had no sooner walked out of this village, on my way to argentat, than i
became aware that the girondin climate was beginning to make itself felt.
the influence of the plains was overcoming that of the highlands. the warm
rocky slopes on each side of the valley were covered with vines--alas! dead
or dying. there was no hope for them. on the level of the river were fields
of maize, now ripening, and irrigated meadows intensely green. there were
beehives, fifteen or twenty together on the sunny slopes, and as i went on,
the signs of human industry and ease increasing, i saw petunias climbing
over cottage doors. there was a steep descent to argentat. the town lay in
a wide valley by the dordogne, in the midst of maize and buckwheat fields
and green meadows, the surrounding hillsides being covered here with
chestnut woods, and there with vines. i met a woman returning from market
with melons in her basket. truly i had come into a different climate. at
the small town, made pretty by the number of its vine trellises, i lunched.
the inn where i stopped is not worth describing; but it gave me a dish of
gudgeons caught in the dordogne that deserved to be remembered.

i did not remain long at argentat, for i was determined to reach beaulieu
that night. a little out of the town some girls whom i passed on the road
looked very suspiciously at me out of the corners of their eyes, and
reminded me that another whom i had met that morning higher up the valley
took to her heels at the sight of me. an old woman who had lived long
enough to overcome such timidity, asked me if i was a _marchand_, by which
she meant pedlar--the old question to which i have grown weary of replying.
about a mile from the town i found the dordogne again. it had grown to
quite a fine river since i last saw it in the ravines below bort. many an
eager affluent had rushed into it, both on the correze and the cantal side.
here most of the grass was dried up, and the freshness of the highlands was
gone. still the valley was shut in by steep cliffs. brambles climbed about
the rocks, where the broom also flourished, although tangled with
its parasite, the dodder. looking up the crags, i recognised a wild
fig-tree--the first i had seen on this southward journey.

the valley became again so narrow that the road was cut into the escarped
side of the cliff, for the river ran close under it. a woman with bare legs
and bare chest--really half naked--trudged by with a heavy bundle of
maize upon her head, followed by a couple of red-haired children, their
perfectly-shaped little legs browned by the sun and powdered with dust. how
beautiful are the limbs of these peasant children, however disfigured by
toil and the inherited physical blight of hardship their mother's form may
be! with each fresh generation, nature seems to make an effort to go back
to her ideal type; but destiny is strong. old and new causes working
together are often more than a match for that most marvellous force in all
animal and vegetable life--the love of symmetry.

resting upon a bed of peppermint, blue with flowers, under an old wall,
whose stones were half hidden by celandine and roving briony; loitering
dreamily upon a wide waste of sunlit pebbles, watching the flashing rapids
of the river where it awoke from its calm sleep to battle with the rocks
which had resisted incalculable ages of washing, the hours glided by so
stealthily that it was evening when i reached a village which was still
eight miles or more from beaulieu.

turning into an inn, i fell into conversation with a postman, who made me
the offer of his company during the remainder of the journey. i readily
assented, and gave him a glass of absinthe--his favourite drink--before
leaving. he did not need it, for, as he confessed, he had been clinking
glasses with unusual zeal that day. he was a very droll fellow, a striking
type of the southerner, whom it was difficult to look at with a serious
face, and whom no one with any sense of humour could really dislike,
notwithstanding his immense vanity and his immeasurable impudence. he had a
thick black beard, a long, sharp nose, dark eyes full of mischievous mirth,
and cheeks the colour of red wine. he wore a stiff new blouse with a red
collar--the badge of his office--and a straw hat like a beehive. the whole
of the way to beaulieu his tongue was not still a minute. he told me
stories of his bravery and his love adventures with a most amusing accent
and intonation. the rabelaisian expressions, which give such a peculiar
flavour to the conversation of the 'people' in southern france, rolled off
his tongue with a sonority that could hardly have been excelled at nimes
or tarascon. his swagger, his gestures, and his elocutionary power were
amazing. he would stop walking, and, placing his stick--which he called
his _trique_--under his arm, would speak in a tragic stage-whisper; then,
clutching his _trique_ and flourishing it over his head, he would burst out
into a roar of laughter that made the dogs bark in the scattered farms for
miles around. once, when we were passing under high rocks, he shouted with
such a terrible voice that he brought some loose stones rattling down upon
the road so close to us that my head, as well as his own, nearly paid the
penalty for thus exasperating the peaceful night. this was either the
effect of vibration or of the sudden movement of some bird or other
creature that he had startled far above us.

among other things of which this amusing man talked to me was a visit of
archaeologists, among whom were a number of englishmen, to beaulieu.

'if you had only seen them,' he said, 'outside the church, all with their
noses lifted in the air! _grand dieu!_ what noses!'

long before we reached beaulieu i had had more than enough of the wild
spirits of my comic postman. on entering the town he insisted upon
taking me to a hotel which he said he could recommend to me with as much
confidence as if i were his brother. then he left me; but i had not seen
the last of him. he presently returned, while i was enjoying the luxury
of a quiet and well-served little dinner. seating himself in front of me
without waiting for an invitation, he helped himself with his fingers to
a dish of baked _cepes_, which i in consequence relinquished, but with a
complete absence of goodwill. there was no getting rid of him, short of
telling him plainly to go, and this i could not do after having accepted
his companionship on the road. he devoured all the mushrooms, expressing
his astonishment between whiles that i did not like them. '_j'aime bien
les champignons,_' he kept on repeating. '_ca me va le soir. ce n'est pas
lourd._' when the dessert was brought in, he picked out the only ripe
peach in the dish, and having poured another glass of wine down his really
terrible throat, he declared that it had given him great pleasure to make
my acquaintance, and left me with the hope that i should sleep well,
and would not forget the beaulieu postman. i assured him, with perfect
sincerity, that i should never forget him.

when daylight returned i found beaulieu a pleasant little town lying
under hills covered with chestnut woods, and at a short distance from the
dordogne. its name, however, was probably given to it on account of the
fertility of the soil in this bit of valley, where the cliffs that enclose
the dordogne on each side fall back, and, by allowing a rich alluvium to
settle in the plain, give the husbandmen a chance of growing something more
profitable than buckwheat.

beaulieu was once the seat of a powerful benedictine abbey. the original
monastery was founded in 858 by charles le chauve, who placed it under
his protection. although the territory was included in the viscounty of
turenne, the viscount raymond ii., before he went crusading, made over
his suzerain rights with regard to the abbey and its dependencies to the
abbots, who thus became temporal lords. there is nothing left of the
monastery; but much of the abbey church, which dates from the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, has been fortunately preserved. the interior is not
remarkable, but the large and elaborate bas-relief of the last judgment
which fills the tympanum of the portal is considered the most precious
example of mediaeval sculpture in the bas-limousin. the face of the
saviour, expressive of something above all human passions and motives,
shows a really god-like combination of serenity and severity. the fantastic
spirit of the age is well set forth in the tortured forms of the horrid
reptiles and fabulous beasts carved in relief upon the massive lintel, and
filling also the broad border at the base of the tympanum. the same
spirit finds even stronger expression in the demon figure, so grotesquely
long-drawn out, carved upon the scalloped pillar that supports the lintel.
the abbey was pillaged by the huguenots, who lit a fire in the choir, which
destroyed much of the woodwork. notwithstanding the religious wars and
the revolutionary convulsions of the eighteenth century, the church has
preserved some of its ancient treasure, of which the most precious object
is a silver statue of the virgin of very curious workmanship, dating from
the twelfth century.

[illustration: turenne.]




in the viscounty of turenne.


what gives us the zest to wander until the hour comes when we must fain be
content to sit in the porch, thankful if the evening sun shines warmly, is
the fascination of the unknown. as children, did we not long to get at
the horizon's verge, to touch the painted clouds of the morning or of the
sunset--ay, and to grasp with our outstretched hands that reached such a
little way the blood-red glory of the sun itself? the garden, with its
glowing tulips and its roses haunted by gilded beetles, became too small
to satisfy the mind of infancy fresh from the infinite. surely, i thought,
when i was again in the open country beyond beaulieu, i must have carried
something of my childhood on with me, for me to go wandering over these hot
hills exposing myself to sunstroke, weariness, and thirst for the sake of
the unknown.

the road at first led up vine-covered slopes towards the west, where the
waysides were blue with the flowers of the wild chicory. a priest astride
upon a rough old cob passed me, his hitched-up _soutane_ showing his
gaitered legs. the french rural priests are generally rubicund, but this
one was cadaverous. he would have looked like death on horseback, swathed
in a black mantle, but for the dangling gaitered legs, which spoilt the
solemn effect. a very curious figure did he cut upon his shaggy, ambling
steed. on the top of the hill was a village, in the midst of which stood a
little old gothic church with a gable-belfry, and hard by was a half-timber
house, its porch aglow with climbing petunias.

beyond this village was a deep valley, the sides of which were covered with
chestnut-trees. on ascending the opposite hill, i took a by-path through a
steep wood, thinking to cut off a long turn of the hot and dusty road. it
led me into difficulties and bewilderment. the path disappeared, but i went
on. after climbing rocks densely overgrown with brambles, which left their
daggers in my skin, i reached the top of the hill, and saw before me a
desert of disintegrated rock or drift dotted over with low juniper bushes.
although it was the middle of september, the sun blazed above me with the
ardour of july, and the rays were thrown back by the bare stones, on which
there was not a trace of moss, nor even lichen. these arid rocky places, so
characteristic of southern france, have a poetry of their own that to me
is ever enticing. i love the stony wastes and their dazzling sun-glitter.
there i find something that approaches companionship in the prickly
juniper, the narcotic hellebore, and the acrid spurge. and these plants
likewise love the places where the world has remained unchanged by man. the
heat, however, was too great for me to linger upon this shadeless hill,
where every stone was warm, and the reflected glare was almost as blinding
as that of the sun itself, which seemed so near.

having crossed another valley, after much casting about, i found the
highroad again. the altitude was considerable here, so that the view
embraced a wide expanse of the correze and the department of the lot, which
i was approaching. the scene was everything that an english landscape is
not. no soft verdure, no hedgerows setting memory astir with pictures of
the flowering may and the pink, clambering dog-rose gemmed with dew; no
lustrous meadow crossed by shadows thrown by ancient dreaming elms; no
flash from the briskly-flowing brook: no, nothing of this, but in its place
a parched and rugged land of hills or knolls, stony, wasteful, where for
countless ages the juniper, the broom, the gorse, and the heather have
disputed the sovereignty, the intervening valleys, timidly cultivated,
producing little else but rye and buckwheat, and the deep gorges sombre
with overhanging trees.

this road was so tedious, so hot and dusty, that, after walking a few miles
upon it, i lost patience altogether with what seemed to be its unreasonable
windings, and again made an effort to strike across country by means of
by-paths, in order to reach the spot where, according to the map and
compass, i thought vayrac ought to be. i came to a seventeenth century
country-house, large enough to be termed a chateau, but now the dwelling of
some peasant-farmer. it was a dilapidated, apparently owl-haunted building,
with a dovecote tower over grown with ivy, and was half surrounded by a
wall, whose tottering, ornamental pinnacles told a story of comparative
grandeur that had come to grief in this remote spot. the farmer had been
winnowing his corn outside, and the narrow lane was ankle-deep with chaff.
the only human being that i could find here was a wild-looking girl, with a
bush of hair on her head, who made me understand, half in french, half in
patois, that i should never reach vayrac by the way i was going. she sent
me off in another direction. i walked on, i know not how many miles,
without coming to any village or wayside auberge, over a shadeless plain in
the department of the lot. there was no water; consequently not a bird was
to be seen or heard. but there were myriads of flies, and too many hornets
for my comfort, for some of them followed me with impertinent curiosity.

i confess that i do not like hornets. when i see them, they remind me of
the story of a donkey told me by a man in these parts. he in his youth
saw an unlucky ass that, quietly browsing, unconscious of indiscretion,
disturbed a hornets' nest. suddenly the animal showed symptoms of unusual
excitement, which became rapidly more violent, until, after some amazing
antics, first on his front-legs and then on his hind-legs, he rolled over
on his back, and kicked violently at the sky. his master knew what had
happened, but stood lamenting afar off, not daring to go to the rescue. in
a short time the poor donkey ceased kicking, and swelled up in a manner
horrible to behold.

all nature now appeared to be baking. even the blackberries, which i ate
by the handful to slake my raging thirst, were warm. a long, straight road
that i thought would never end brought me at length to vayrac, where there
was a good inn. oh, the luxury of rest at last in a shaded room, with the
companionship of a jug of frothing beer just brought up from the cool
cellar!

  *        *        *        *        *

months passed before i continued from this point my journey on foot. the
spring had come, and the face of nature was wondrously changed. over the
valley that i had seen before so parched had spread the soft verdure of
young grass; hedges of quince were all abloom, and at their roots the
stitchwort mingled its white starry flowers with the matchless blue of the
germander speedwell, so dear to english eyes. the roadsides were bright
with daisies and the gold of the ill-appreciated dandelion.

a lane from vayrac led up to the escarped sides of the puy d'issolu--the
uxellodunum of the cadurci, according to napoleon iii. and others who have
made caesar's battlefields in gaul their study. it was april, and from near
and afar came the warbling of nightingales. they moved amongst the new
leaves of almost every shrub and tree. a very abrupt ascent through
thickets brought me to the tableland, where the turf was flashed with
splendid flowers of the purple orchids. from the waste land the sombre
junipers rose like scattered cypresses in a cemetery.

if this was not the site of uxellodunum, we may pretty safely believe it to
have been that of some important _oppidum_ of the gauls. a circumvallation
there could never have been in a strict sense, for where the plateau rests
upon high calcareous walls there was no need of a fortification. but
elsewhere, where the position was accessible from the valley, it was
protected by a strong wall. on the northern side this rampart can be
followed for a considerable distance without a break. in one spot the soil
which has collected about it has been dug away, leaving the masonry bare.
it is not composed of loose stones of various sizes, like that of the
celtic city at murcens, but of small flat stones neatly laid together, with
layers of mortar between; a circumstance that sets one conjecturing and
doubting. the wall appears to have been six or eight feet thick. the line
of it now only rises very slightly above the edge of the plateau.

i met a peasant who owned the highest part of the tableland, and who
managed to grow crops upon it. near his cottage he pointed out the remains
of an ancient structure, which he called the fort. the masonry was of the
same character as that of the wall. near to it were fragments of ancient
pottery and tiles, which he had dug out of the ground. the tiles were
very heavy and flat, with turned-up edges, so that they could hang one to
another. there were holes, too, for the nails which held them to the roof.
thrown on one side were human bones, which had from time to time been
turned up by the plough. the peasant told me that his father, while digging
rather deeply, had found a skeleton wearing a bracelet and part of a
helmet. a visitor to the puy d'issolu, many years ago, was allowed to take
these remains away, together with a quantity of iron arrow-heads, on his
promise to come back and pay 600 francs for them. he never came back.

the view from the puy takes in an immense expanse of the solemn limousin
country. to the south is the stone-strewn quercy, while to the north and
east is the still wilder correze. on the west lie the forests of black
perigord. looking to the east, i saw the mountains of auvergne, the
mont-dore range rising beyond the correze against the blue sky, as white as
the sugar towers and pinnacles upon a bride-cake. here it was warm, like
june weather in england; there winter still reigned upon the snowy hills.
standing against the north-western horizon were the high towers of the vast
feudal fortress of the viscounts of turenne. it was there that madame de
conde, escaping from mazarin, planned the rising of guyenne in 1648. i
could only distinguish the towers, but i knew that a little below them was
the small mediaeval town of turenne, which grew up under the protection of
the viscounts, who for centuries were virtually the sovereign princes of
this region. no lover of the picturesque would waste his time by going
there.

descending from the tableland on the southern side, where the rocks form a
steep little gorge, i came to the stream from which the besieged cadurci
are supposed to have drawn their water-supply, until it was cut off by
caesar. looking at the spot, it is easy to understand how it all happened.
the natural fortress, selected with so much judgment by the cadurci, was
almost unassailable. to help them, they had the cover of the wood that
still fills the gorge, but which was probably much denser then than it is
now. from his tower of ten stages, which commanded the fountain, caesar
continually harassed with darts, thrown by the _tormenta_, those who came
to the spring; and he, moreover, tells us that he caused a gallery to be
tunnelled to the fountainhead, and thus drew off the water, to the utter
astonishment and despair of the cadurci, who perceived in this disaster the
intervention of the gods. a tunnel such as he describes exists, and the
stream flows through it. at a point some distance higher, the sound of
gurgling water can be distinctly heard beneath the stones; and it was here
probably where the stream originally broke out, and where the inhabitants
of the _oppidum_ came with their vessels. napoleon iii. had the
subterranean gallery cleared, and its artificial character was proved by
the discovery that massive beams of wood, of which there were some remains,
had been used to prevent the soil from falling in upon the workers. it has
now been nearly filled up again by the calcareous deposit of the water.
the river mentioned by caesar as the one that flowed in the valley beneath
uxellodunum [footnote: 'flumen infimam vallam lividebat quae totum
poene montem cingebat, in quo positum erat praeruptum undique oppidum
uxellodunum.'--'de bello gallico,' lib. viii.] is a small tributary of the
dordogne, called the tourmente. this is assuming the puy d'issolu to have
been uxellodunum. the most convincing material proof that the two places
are the same was furnished by the discovery of the tunnel; but some strong
corroborative evidence is to be found in local names. the word _puy_
affords no clue; for it simply means a high place. in the dialect of the
viscounty of turenne the puy d'issolu is pronounced _lo pe de cholu_. in
the word issolu or cholu, we may have something of the celtic word, which
was latinized by caesar after his custom; but this verbal similarity would
not in itself go far to prove the identity of the height near vayrac with
the position defended by drappes and lucterius. lying in the correze at
no great distance from the dordogne is the town of ussel--a name that
approaches much more nearly the sound of uxellodunum. but an educated
native of vayrac, whom i chanced to meet months after my visit to the puy
d'issolu, furnished me with some local testimony which appears to be
of value in connection with a subject that has given rise to so much
controversy. the stream where it issues near the base of the rocky height
has been known in the neighbourhood from time immemorial as 'lo foun
conino'--conino's fountain. conino is a natural romance corruption of
caninius, the name of caesar's lieutenant who in the first instance
directed the siege of uxellodunum. the french name for the stream at the
bottom of the valley already mentioned is derived from the romance one, lo
tourmento. now, as caesar made so much use of _tormenta_ as engines of war,
to prevent the besieged cadurci from drawing water, something may easily
have occurred to associate the stream with one of these machines. it is to
be observed, however, that there are other streams in france to which the
name tourmente has been given, and of which the explanation is much more
simple.

[illustration: a peasant of the causse.]

how solemnly still seemed this spectre-haunted spot in the quiet evening!
there was the groaning murmur of the stream flowing down its subterranean
passage, and there was the low and fitful warble of a nightingale; but this
was all. who, passing by here without foreknowledge, would suppose that on
this bit of desert the great struggle between rome and gaul was brought
to a close? what a wonderful thing is a book, that it should preserve age
after age, with undiminished reality, all the torment, anguish, and passion
of a siege, and give a human interest to rocks and streams, which without
such aid would tell us nothing of the horrid tumult that raged over and
around them! now i can see the half-naked gauls rolling down their barrels
of flaming pitch upon the roman engineers, and hear that great clamour
of the besiegers and the besieged of which caesar speaks. above were the
celtic heroes defending their last rock with the obstinacy of despair, and
ready to accept death in any form but that of thirst; and here were the
veteran legionaries exposing themselves day after day to the burning pitch,
the stones, and the arrows of the defenders, with that disciplined courage
and unwavering resolve to conquer which made rome the mistress of the
world. but the most terrible scene must have been that in which the gaulish
warriors, after their surrender, had their hands cut off. what frightful
business was that, and what a heap of hands must have been buried
somewhere, either upon the table-land or in the valley! a deep-ploughing
peasant may long since have come upon an extraordinary collection of little
bones, and been much puzzled by them. and poor drappes, who, after his
capture, refused to eat, and died from starvation; he must have been buried
somewhere near. but nature says nothing about all these things; she covers
up the traces of human ferocity with her new leaves and moss, and smiles
there as tenderly as upon children's graves.

i passed the night at st. denis, a modern place brought into existence by
the line to toulouse. at the auberge the evening was enlivened by dancing.
two maids of the inn found partners in a couple of rustic youths, and a
young soldier _en conge_ provided the music by whistling, or imitating the
hurdy-gurdy with his mouth. for it was the _bourree_ that was danced.

the next morning i was on the road to martel, with nightingales and
blackcaps singing all around from blossoming quince and hawthorn and copses
filled with a gold-green glimmer, until i reached the bare upland country.
upon the barren _causse_, besides the short turf, the gray ribs of rock,
and scattered stones, little was to be seen but dark little junipers, tall
broom, not yet in flower, hellebore, with bright tufts of new leaves and
evil-looking green blossoms edged with dull purple, and the numberless
gilded umbels of the spurge, which in springtime lend such beauty to the
southern desert. in the dips and little dingles there were stunted oaks
with the brown foliage, that had been beaten by the winter winds in vain,
still clinging to them, but which every breath of western breeze now
scattered, because the buds were swelling and the unborn leaves were asking
to come forth. at wide distances above the undulating, sterile land a
farmhouse would appear, with high-pitched tiled roof, and a pigeon-house
rising like a tower at one end. the stranger marvels to see such
substantially-built houses in the midst of such sterility; but he finds
the explanation when he has time to consider that there are so many stones
lying about that, where it is possible to plough, the peasant heaps them up
in his field, or makes walls that are little wanted. having reached the top
of a knoll, i saw beneath me many old tiled roofs whose lines ran at all
angles, and above these rose the massive walls of a half-fortified church,
and various towers or fragments of towers. i was looking at martel.

according to legend and local history, charles martel, after defeating the
saracens near this spot, caused a church to be built on a piece of fertile
land a few miles from the battlefield, and dedicated it to st. maur. a town
grew around church and monastery, and was named martel in honour of the
founder. in the early days of the crusades, when princes and barons
rivalled one another in virtuous zeal, a viscount of turenne decreed that
inhabitants of martel who were convicted of sinning against the marriage
tie should be dragged naked through the town. the charter that contains
this enactment treats of villeinage also, and orders that whoever has a man
for sale within the limits of the viscounty shall fix the price, and shall
not change it afterwards.

the marriage of eleanor of aquitaine and henry plantagenet brought the
english to martel in the twelfth century; but it does not appear that they
obtained or cared to keep anything like a permanent grip on the place until
the fourteenth century. inasmuch, however, as henry short-mantle, the
rebellious son of henry ii., met with no resistance at martel when he came
thither, after pillaging the sanctuary of roc-amadour in 1183, it may be
concluded that english influence was already established there. in the
market place is a house a portion of which was once included in a building
that has now nearly disappeared, but which is known to every inhabitant as
the 'palace of henry ii.' on the first floor, communicating with a spiral
staircase, is a room paved with small pebbles. on one side is a broad
chimney-place, just such as we see now all through guyenne, even in the
towns. according to the tradition preserved by the family to whom the house
belongs, it was in one of the chimney-corners of this room that prince
henry sat on the evening of the day that he left roc-amadour. it is
uncertain, however, whether the prince went to martel immediately after the
sacrilege, or after a pilgrimage that he made to the sanctuary to atone for
his crime, when he was suffering from the disease that killed him. there
is a local legend that he was followed by two monks, who contrived to put
poison into his goblet; but whether he was poisoned or died of dysentery at
martel, as the chroniclers maintain, is a detail of small importance. that
he did die here, and very repentantly, on a bed of ashes, and held up by
the bishop of cahors, is a historical fact.

an indubitable testimony of the english occupation of martel is the
heraldic leopard of the plantagenets. i found it carved in stone among
the ruins of king henry's palace, and hard by i saw it again upon a rusty
fireplate that had been thrown into a corner. there is not a native of
martel who is not ready to talk of _le leopard anglais_.

the english were never loved by the martellois. the people of this district
are strong in their attachments, and perhaps even stronger in their
animosities and prejudices. without doubt the english did not treat them
with marked tenderness; but there was very little human kindness in the
middle ages, and the french, or the races which now compose france, left
nothing to be invented in the arts of cruelty and oppression in the wars
that they waged among themselves before they learnt, or were forced to
learn, that it was to their interest to hold together and form one
nation. moreover, the greater number of the so-called english who kept a
considerable part of aquitaine in continual terror for three centuries were
natives of the soil.

all the men of martel who could carry arms joined the forces of king john,
who was defeated by the black prince at poitiers. the consuls of martel had
to pay heavy ransoms for their fellow-townsmen who fell into the hands
of the english. notwithstanding the disaster at poitiers, the martellois
closed their gates and prepared for a siege, after having obtained from
the viscount a company of crossbow-men to help them in the defence. but an
english garrison was soon established at montvallent, only a few miles off,
and this fact seems to have demoralized the martellois, who, after enduring
a few assaults, surrendered the town. the longest period of unbroken
english possession of martel appears to have occurred after this surrender.
it is probable that the senechaussee, which now exists under the name of
the hotel de ville, was commenced about this time, although the king of
england must have been represented in the town by his seneschal long
before. by the treaty passed between henry iii. and reymond vi. of turenne
in 1223, it was stipulated that the viscount should pay homage to henry,
but that the english officers should exercise no jurisdiction in the
viscounty, except in the town of martel, where the king could hold his
assizes with the consent of the viscount. it was, moreover, provided that
in the event of resistance on the part of his fiefs, the viscount could
apply to the english seneschal at martel for armed assistance. the burghers
were in the enjoyment of their political franchises from the year 1256.
they had town councillors, who elected four consuls every four years, who
represented the borough in the etats vicomtains--an assembly composed of
the principal landholders and dignitaries of the viscounty. the more they
tasted freedom the more the burghers felt disposed to quarrel with the
viscount. in 1355 they sent a deputation to the pope at avignon begging
him to ask their lord if it was his wish that the town should retain its
privileges. the minutes of the municipal meeting, at which this decision
was come to, are in existence, and they show how the romance language was
written at martel in those days:

  'item fo ordenat que moss. aymar de bessa et p. karti ano a
  vinho far reverensa al papa per nom de la vila eque phi recomendo
  la vila. e quelh fasso supplicacio quelh plassa far am los vescomte
  se bot que nos garde nostres previleges.'

this ancient town has suffered grievously from that spirit of demolition
which was so active during the first half of the present century, but
which in france has been somewhat checked by the commission of historic
monuments. there are people who can remember when the town was surrounded
by two walls; now only a few remnants of the fortifications remain. the
church is exceedingly interesting. there are details indicating a very
early origin--they may possibly have come down from the foundation; but the
structure in the main belongs to the twelfth and fifteenth centuries. the
east end--the oldest portion--has more the character of a stronghold than
of a church. it has no apse, and the terminating wall, which is carried far
above the roof, has a row of machicolations, and the massive buttresses by
which it is flanked are really towers pierced with loopholes. at the foot
of the wall is a deep pool of water, which serves as the horse-pond for the
town; but it may originally have been part of a moat.

in the tympanum of the twelfth-century portal is one of those bas-reliefs
representing the last judgment upon which the artistic ambition of the
early gothic period appears to have been chiefly directed in this region.

the fourteenth-century senechaussee, with its embattled belfry, its little
turrets or bartizans hanging high at the angles of the wall, its dim old
court, with a deep well in the centre, speaks with a ghostly voice of
ancient martel. this building, after the english left, was the residence of
the seneschals of the viscounts of turenne down to the revolution. in two
of the rooms are chimney-pieces very artistically carved in oak.

notwithstanding all the demolition that has gone on, bits of picturesque
antiquity meet the eye everywhere in the old english town. now it is a
half-ruinous watch-tower, now the gothic doorway of a thirteenth-century
house, now a gateway that has lost its tower, but whose wounds are covered
with yellow wallflowers in spring; now a turret running up an entire front,
with little windows looking out upon the quiet street, or some high-pitched
roof curving inward under the weight of years and tiles.

the inn where i put up was like a hostelry of romance. entering by a broad
archway, i passed along a passage vaulted and groined, where corbel-heads
grimaced from dim corners; climbed a staircase broad enough for a palace,
and, having reached the landing, saw a great room with hearth and chimney
to match, massive old furniture, pots and pans of highly-polished copper,
and a hostess stout and cheery, who welcomed me as though i were an old
friend, and not a wanderer to whom food and shelter were to be exchanged
for money. this good woman had evidently no faith in new fashions; she
dressed as she did thirty years ago, and every dish that she cooked for me
was kept warm by a pewter brazier filled with embers from the hearth.
one of these dishes was a goose's liver half roasted, half stewed, and
sprinkled with capers.

while at martel i was arrested as a spy by an old _garde champetre_, who,
seeing me taking notes of the church, wished to know who gave me permission
to 'make a plan of the town.' i did not reply to him with the politeness
that he evidently considered himself entitled to. it is probable that i
should have chosen my words with more circumspection had i guessed what an
important person he was; but as he wore a blouse, and was squatting upon
a heap of stones which he had been pulling about, i underestimated his
dignity. that he united the functions of _cantonnier_ and _garde_ did not
occur to me. he sprang to his feet, put on his official badge, and, seizing
me by the arm, shouted: 'i arrest you!' then, when i took the liberty of
removing his hand, he called out: '_au secours!_'

but those to whom he appealed were women, who preferred to let him manage
his own business, and who, moreover, were too much amused to interfere.
when he had calmed down a little i walked with him to the deputy-mayor,
whose office was over a little shop. after hearing me and examining my
papers, this gentleman was satisfied that i was not a very dangerous
person, and he told me that i had better forget the incident.

the fierce old man could not understand why i was released. he even
protested: '_il dit qu'il est un anglais; mais il le dit!_'

the deputy-mayor tried to calm him by observing that i had a right to be an
englishman. the _garde_ then walked out, looking very hot and puzzled. from
his childhood he had heard of the english as the worst tyrants that
the region had known. was not the country strewn with the ruins of the
fortresses they had built? to his mind they were more dangerous enemies
than the germans, who never came near martel. i bear no grudge against the
old man. he believed that he was doing his duty in arresting me, and if i
had made more allowance for his age and prejudices the unpleasantness might
have been avoided. to him the old struggle with the english was almost as
fresh as if it had taken place in his father's time.

people who remain in the same place all their days, and who never read,
live much more in the past than others, and remember injuries done to their
remote ancestors as if they, the latest descendants, were still suffering
from them, i remember asking a woman in an inn not far from martel how an
old gateway and other mediaeval buildings close by had been brought to such
a sad state of ruin.

'it was you,' she exclaimed, 'who did that--_vous autres anglais!_'

and she looked so resentful for a few moments that i wished i had let the
sleeping dog lie.




in upper perigord.


leaving martel, i crossed the valley of the dordogne, and passed on to
other valleys southward and eastward, as recounted in the story of my
wanderings by 'southern waters.' many months went by, and then one summer
day found me wayfaring again by the dordogne towards the sea. a little
below the point where i had crossed in search of the ouysse i came to the
small town of souillac. this place, although fortified in the middle ages,
played a much less important part in the wars of the quercy than the
neighbouring burgs of martel and gourdon. its interest lies mainly in its
twelfth-century church, and here chiefly in a very remarkable bas-relief of
the last judgment. this astonishing work of art is to be found not where
one would expect it to be, namely, in the tympanum of the portal, but in
the interior, against a wall at the west end, over a gothic arch, whose
transition from the preceding style is marked by a billet-moulding. the
sculpture is in a high degree typical of the uncouth vigour of the period.
the two pillars supporting the arch are so carved as to represent figures
of the damned going down into hell. the artist might have been inspired by
dante had he not lived before the poet who collected and fixed upon the
sombre canvas of his verse all the woeful visions of eternal punishment
that haunted the mediaeval mind. a man and woman are descending to the
abyss, he holding her by the hair, and she clasping him by the waist, the
faces of both terribly expressive of horror that is new, and utter despair.
the meaning is plain, enough: each was the cause of the other's doom, and
the sentence of the judge in the panel above has united them in hell for
all eternity. on the opposite pillar are another couple, also clasping one
another; but their faces express the blank and passionless misery of a
doom foreknown. monk or layman, he who designed the composition felt the
necessity of giving this tragic warning to his fellow-beings. centuries
later an english poet expressed the same idea in verse:

  'the woman's cause is man's! they rise or sink
  together, dwarfed or god-like, bond or free.'

one of the less conspicuous figures is going down head foremost in the
company of an animal that looks very like a pig. this beast having been
damned by ecclesiastical sculptors in france as early as the twelfth
century, and probably earlier, it is not surprising that a polite peasant,
when he mentions it by name, often excuses himself for his supposed breach
of good manners by adding: '_sauf votre respect_.'

nearing a village not far from souillac, and wondering the while what had
become of the picturesque, i saw, as if by enchantment, a few yards away, a
little old church covered with ivy, and surrounded by tombstones that were
stained with the dead colours of last winter's lichen; one leaning this
way, another that, but all going down into the grassy graves. a few chairs
and a single bench told that the people who came here to pray were not many
nor rich. most of the flagstones were broken, and the altar was almost
simple enough to please a calvinist. it was the simplicity, not of
intention, but of poverty. are such churches--lost amidst the pensive
trees, or bathed by the tender evening light upon the vine-clad
hillside--doubly hallowed, or is it the poetry of old memories and ideal
pictures stored away behind a multitude of newer impressions that moves us
like the wind-blown strains of half-forgotten melodies as we pass them in
our wanderings?

evening found me by the dordogne, that flowed calmly in a salmon-coloured
light, thrown down by a wasteful stony hill, itself lit up by a reflected
glow of the sinking sun. the meadows through which the little path ran were
dotted all over with golden spots of lotus, and near the water the pale,
pure yellow of the evening primrose shone against the darkening willows.
the voices of unseen peasants, labouring somewhere in the fields so long
as the daylight lasted, were carried up the valley by the breeze, just
loosened from its leash; but the sound was only a little louder than the
whispering of the poplars.

the gloaming lingered until i reached the village of cazoules. at the inn
where i decided to pass the night i fell among bicyclists--quite a crowd of
them--all young, frantic with the excitement of some break-neck run, and
noisy enough to shock the dog's sense of decorum, for he slunk off with
his tail between his legs. having slaked their thirst, the jovial band
of enthusiasts sprang upon their steel horses and dashed off into the
darkness, where their voices were quickly lost.

while waiting for dinner, i found nothing so amusing as listening to a high
dispute between the hostess and a travelling butcher, with whom she had
long had dealings, but whom she had lately deserted because she had found
another who sold cheaper. the butcher called his rival a 'dirty sparrow,'
but at length proposed to yield the sou on each pound of meat by means of
which the 'sparrow' had scored his victory. in future all his meat was to
be sold at eleven sous, and on these terms he was restored to favour. thus,
by playing one man off against the other, the artful woman was able to save
quite a pile of sous every week on her general expenses. the frenchwoman of
ordinary intelligence, whether she belongs to the north or the south, the
east or the west, may be safely trusted to beat any man of her own race at
bargaining.

for a rural inn this one at cazoules was good and substantial, but it
provided a little too much irritation at night to be consistent with
peaceful slumber and happy dreams. this was not, perhaps, the fault of the
inn, but of the dordogne valley. as soon as the day broke another enemy
entered the field. the flies then awoke, refreshed but hungry, and
determined to make the most of a good opportunity. the house-flies of the
north, when compared to those of the south, seem to have been well brought
up, and trained to live with human beings on terms of civility, if not of
friendship. the flies of southern france must be descended from those that
were sent to worry pharaoh, and when one has lived with them during the
months of august and september, one can quite believe that their ancestors
exasperated the egyptian king to the point of promising anything so that
they might be taken from him.

it was not until i had walked away from cazoules that i realized where i
was. i had left the quercy while wandering through those meadows as the sun
was sinking, and had entered perigord--once famous for troubadours, and
now for truffles. nobody can live there today by making verses, and the
representative of the jongleur, who once sang from castle to castle to the
accompaniment of the mediaeval fiddle, and who was so heartily welcomed at
all the baronial feasts and merrymakings, is now a wandering beggar, who
gathers crusts from the peasants by his rude minstrelsy, that changes
from the pious to the obscene, or from the obscene to the pious, as the
character and taste of the audience may decide. many persons, however,
contrive to prosper by hunting for truffles in the exhilarating company
of pigs. it is not in this fertile valley that they find them, but on the
hillsides and stony table-lands, where the oak flourishes, but never grows
tall.

i passed almost at the foot of one of those darkly-wooded, precipitous
hills or cliffs which now approach the water's edge and now recede for
a mile or more in this part of the valley; widening or diminishing the
cultivated land accordingly as the rocky sides of the fissure resisted the
washing and mining of the ancient waters.

on the top of the cliff stood a high round tower--the keep of a small
feudal stronghold. it is called the tour de mareuil. its position leaves
little doubt that in old times its owners, like so many other nobles whose
ruined castles crown the heights on both sides of the dordogne, levied toll
upon the boats that came up or went down the river. navigation must have
been always difficult on account of the strong current and the numerous
rapids and shallows; but the stream was a means of communication between
bordeaux, perigord, and the haut-quercy that was not to be despised,
and probably some care was taken to keep the channel open. according to
tradition, the english made frequent use of it. the tolls were an important
source of income to the nobles whose fortresses overlooked the river. a
sharp look-out was always kept from the towers for approaching boats.

i was on my way to the castle where fenelon first saw the light, and in
order to reach it i had to cross the river. an old flat-bottomed boat,
built for conveying men, asses, and other animals from one side to the
other, lay off the bank, and two girls, who were in charge of a flock of
geese as well as of the ferry, were willing to take me across. while the
elder ferried, the younger examined me carefully at close quarters,
and apparently with much interest. presently she asked me if i sold
writing-paper. after landing, i soon reached the village of st. mondane.
here i halted at an inn in the shadow of old walnut-trees. a few yards off,
under one of the great trees, was a high wooden crucifix, around which some
twenty or thirty geese were standing or lying down, all in a digestive or
contemplative mood, and through the openings between the boles and the
branches were seen the sunlit meadows sloping to the low willows and the
flashing river.

from st. mondane a charming road or lane between very high banks that are
almost cliffs leads upward to the chateau de la motte-fenelon, where, in
1651, was born francois de salignac de la motte, known to the world as
fenelon. having reached the top of the hill, i soon came in view of a
picturesque mass of masonry with round towers capped with pointed roofs,
and with gothic gables hanging lightly in the air over dormer windows; the
whole rising out of a dense grove of trees in the midst of a quiet sunny
landscape. when quite near i found that the grove was a sombre little wood
of ever-green oaks. the same wood, if not the actual oaks, may have been
there in fenelon's time, for the ilex is one of the commonest trees in
perigord on the hills about the dordogne. as a boy, while climbing here,
he may have torn his hose into tatters, notwithstanding his precocious
knowledge of greek. the future churchman may even have robbed a jay's nest
on this very spot. what quietude and what deep shadow! not a leaf stirred;
only a fiery shaft of sunshine forced its way here and there through the
dark roof of unchanging green to the brown soil and the rampart's mossy
wall.

although the present castle was raised when feudalism was nothing more than
a tradition and a sentiment, the outworks, consisting of two walls, the
inner one standing on ground considerably higher than the other, were of
exceptional strength, and as they were originally, so they remain at the
present day. i passed through the outer and then the inner gateway, and, in
my search for a human being, accident led me to the kitchen, which was very
large and entirely paved with pebbles. here i found the cook, who, i had
been told, was the only person in authority at that time. surrounded by
four great walls, on which hung utensils that were rarely handled except
for the periodical scouring, she looked as solemn as a cloistered nun. she
consented, however, to show me the interior of the castle, with a pathetic
readiness which said that the appearance of an occasional visitor kept her
from sinking into hopeless melancholy.

[illustration: chateau de fenelon.]

the most interesting room is the one in which fenelon slept. here is to be
seen his four-post bedstead, each of the posts a slender twisted column,
the silk hangings and fringe looking very worn and faded after being
exposed to the light of over two hundred years. adjoining this room is the
_salle a manger_, the immense hearth, with seats at the ingle corners,
being covered by an elliptical arch. most of the furniture here and
elsewhere is of massive oak, carved in the style of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. the family into whose possession this castle has
passed, although distinct from that of salignac de la motte, which has now
no representative, reverently preserves all that associates the spot with
the memory of the illustrious author of 'telemaque.'

from the top of one of the machicolated towers i saw a vast expanse of
country, singularly grand, but very solemn. from each side of the dordogne
valley rose and stretched away into the distance a seemingly endless
succession of hills, broken up by narrow gorges and glens. over all, or
nearly all these hills lay a dark and scarcely varying mantle of forest.
this tract of country is well named perigord noir. it is one of the few
districts of france which still draw a sum from the government yearly in
the form of prize money for the wolves that are killed there.

i returned to st. mondane and continued my journey westward by the valley,
which brought me every day a little nearer to the sea--still so far away.
as i had no need to hurry, i sat awhile in the late afternoon upon a low
mossy wall, in the deep shade of a dripping, whispering rock, from which
hung delicate green tresses of the maiden's-hair fern. above, the rock was
lost in a steep wilderness of trees and dense undergrowth, which met the
radiant sky somewhere where the eye could not follow. the bell-like tinkle
of water out of sight was the only sound until i heard a patter-patter of
webbed feet coming along the road. a flock of geese were moving homeward,
followed by a woman, whose feet were as bare as theirs, and whose eyes were
fixed upon her distaff and spindle. she would not have noticed me had not
the birds, true to their ancient reputation, given the alarm.

a little later i had left the shadow of the wooded rocks and was on the
margin of the river, which spread out broadly here between its shelving
banks of pebbly shingle. then, to reach by the shortest way the village
where i intended to pass the night, i had to turn once more from the water
and cross some wooded hills. here the jays mocked at the solemnity of the
evergreen oaks, and the dark forest echoed as with the laughter of fiends.

grolejac was the curious name of the village i was seeking, and which i at
length found partly on a hill and partly in the valley of the dordogne.
chance taking me to a house that bore the sign of an inn, although it
was at the back of a farm-yard, i thought i might as well stop there as
anywhere else.

i am waiting for dinner-seldom a cheerful way of killing time. i do not,
however, expose myself to the risk of being irritated by the sight of my
willing but mechanical hostess scraping the white ashes from the embers,
parcelling out these into little heaps of fire upon the hearth, throwing
salt into the swinging pot with a hand the colour of which may be
distressing to the imagination, then tasting the soup: all this, and much
more, i leave her to accomplish in the gathering darkness of the kitchen,
and, sparing her the pain of lighting lamp or candle while there is still
a gleam of day, i wander out beyond the houses of the village to a quiet
woodside, there to watch the coming of night, which, whether it be
accompanied by wailing winds and storm-rack brimming with tears, or by that
grand serenity which grows in beauty as the light fails, is always like the
coming of death.

in the clear obscure, the brown and yellow rocks of bare limestone, at
the foot of which is the small inn, seem to be drawing nearer. all their
details become luminously distinct as the air grows darker, while the
caverns gape like the black mouths of some stealthily approaching,
monstrous, many-headed form. two men are still working in a field of
tobacco, and they go on until lights flash forth from all the houses in the
valley. then they slowly move off into the dusk with their ox and waggon.

all about the fields, where the night crickets are now chirruping and the
flying beetles are droning, there is a general movement of life towards the
village--of men carrying their mattocks on their shoulder or walking in
front of the ox that has done his long day's ploughing, of women and
children, geese, turkeys, and sheep.

[illustration: returning from the fields.]

i wonder if the wooden cross beside the tobacco-field was put there to
mark the spot where somebody died, in accordance with an old and beautiful
custom still much practised in these rural districts of france; but the
thought of the laid table at the auberge changes the train of ideas, so,
following in the wake of the last goose, i, too, take refuge from the night
in the now animated village.

sitting alone at a great table in a room large enough for a marriage feast,
ill-lighted by an oil-lamp, whose flame appears to be afflicted with st.
vitus's dance--a room quite free from ornament, with furniture responding
exclusively to the purposes of resting, eating, and drinking, with
curtainless windows looking out upon the moonless night that is beginning
to sigh and moan at the approach of a storm--my dinner is not a very
cheerful one. not that i am necessarily unhappy when i take a solitary
meal. in this matter all depends upon the mood, and the mood frequently
depends upon influences too subtle to be analyzed. the dinner was as good
as i had a right to expect it to be. a dish on which the hostess had
evidently striven to use her best art was of orange mushrooms in a sauce
of verjuice; but the substantial one was a roast fowl--an unfortunate bird
that was just going to roost with an easy mind, when my coming upset the
arrangements of the inn and the poultry house. one fowl, at all events, had
had good reason to think it was an ill wind that blew me into the village.

it is a bad custom in rural france to kill fowls just when they are wanted
for the spit. not only is it unpleasant to think that a creature is not
allowed time to cool before it begins to turn in front of the fire, but the
art of cooking is placed at a disadvantage by the practice. it is of no
use, however, trying to convince the people of their error, even when they
kill poultry for themselves and can choose their time: they will never do
things otherwise than in the way to which they have been accustomed. the
french are stubbornly conservative in everything except politics.

as i felt the need of talking to-night, i fetched the farming innkeeper
from his kitchen and persuaded him to drink some of his own cognac. this he
did without wincing, but he soon returned the compliment by bringing out of
a cupboard a bottle of clear greenish liquor, which he said was _eau de vie
de figues_. it was something new to me. i had tasted alcohol distilled from
a considerable variety of the earth's fruits, but never from figs before.
it retained a strong flavour of its origin, and might have been correctly
described as fire-water, for it was almost pure spirit.

i drew this man into conversation upon the peasant's life. all that he
said was only confirmation of the opinion i had already formed from other
testimony respecting the occupation of adam when he had to struggle with
nature outside of the terrestrial paradise. let a man own as much soil as
he can till with his hands, let him have an ox, too, to help him: he can
only live at the price of almost incessant labour and rigorous frugality.
this is the normal condition of the peasant-proprietor's existence.

'the peasant who works seriously,' said the farmer, 'does not sleep more
than four hours a night during the summer months. he goes to bed at ten,
and gets up at two. this would not hurt him if he were better fed, but he
eats little besides his soup, and drinks bad _piquette_.'

the man went back to his kitchen, and then to his bed close by; the flame
of the lamp became sick unto death, for it now wanted oil, and the house
grew so quiet that the squeaking of the rats and the pattering of their
feet could be heard from places that seemed far away. but for the rumbling
of the thunder, the only sound from the mysterious world outside would have
been the scream, now like the cry of a cat, now like a puppy's bark, of
an owl flying with muffled wings up and down the valley. very different,
however, was this little owl's cry from the madman's shout of the great
eagle owl, which i had often heard in the rocky vale of the alzon. i
threw open the window of my bedroom and looked out upon the night. it
was illumined, not by moon nor by stars, but by lightning flashes, which
followed one another with such rapidity that there was no darkness. the
quivering flame threw an awful brightness into the great woods upon the
tops of the hills.

a few hours later i was wandering through these woods, which were now
filled with another light that dried the dripping leaves.

some miles of forest, then cultivated slopes, and at length the dordogne
again. i was growing rather weary of searching for the mediaeval town of
domme, when i recognised it by its old ramparts upon the summit of a high
bare hill, which looked very forbidding indeed where it changed to rock,
whose naked escarpments seemed to float as inaccessible as a cloud in the
blue air far above the valley. as i climbed the shadeless stony hill in the
mid-day sun-glare, i thought that if the soldiers of five or six centuries
ago used strong language as they toiled up here in their heavy armour, it
was excusable. i was wellnigh repenting of my resolution to reach domme,
when, by a turn of the road, i found myself not many yards in front of a
fortified gateway of the fourteenth century, with a drumtower on each side
connected by a curtain with the ramparts. at first glance nothing seemed to
be wanting. the towers, however, were ruinous in the upper part, and the
battlements had disappeared.

with the help of a local pork-butcher, who kept the key, i was able to
enter the towers of this gateway. in each was a guard-room of considerable
size, and the men-at-arms while on duty there evidently found that in time
of peace the hours lagged, for some of them had carved upon the wall with
their knives or daggers crucifixes and representations of the virgin and
child, all closely imitated from church sculpture, painting or window
decoration of the gothic period. many names are cut in gothic character on
the same walls; a further proof that the vanity of man has ever sprouted in
much the same way as now. the antiquary, because he has his own prejudices,
perceives an abyss between the act of the cockney tourist of to-day who
carves his name upon an old tower or a menhir, and that of a man who five
centuries ago, for no better reason than the other, left upon a guard-room
wall a similar record of his passage. the man of the present is a vulgar
defacer of interesting monuments, whereas he of the past added to their
interest, and prepared a pleasant little surprise for the archaeologist who
might walk that way a few centuries later.

enough of the fortifications of domme remains to show what a very strong
place it was in the middle ages. much of the wall where the town was not
naturally defended by the high naked rock, forming a frightful precipice
that no besiegers would have attempted to scale, has been well preserved.
standing upon some bastion of this rampart, with the deep valley far below
him and the sky above him, the wanderer may allow his fancy almost to
convince him that he is really standing upon some 'castle in the air.'
of the many rock-perched towns of the south, this is one of the most
remarkable; although, with the exception of the fortifications, little
remains of archaeological interest.

according to the chronicles of jean tarde, a canon of the neighbouring
town of sarlat, who wrote at the end of the sixteenth and beginning of the
seventeenth century, domme was first taken by the english in 1346, but
not without the help of '_quelques traistres_.' from this stronghold they
harassed the surrounding country, 'while the armies of one and the other
party were in normandy and picardy, and that battle of cressi (crecy) was
fought to the disadvantage of the party of france. towards the end of the
year a truce was accorded, but it was in no way observed in perigord by the
english.'

the correct date of the capture of domme appears to have been 1347. the men
who treasonably delivered up the place were afterwards hanged by the french
party when they regained possession of the stronghold. in 1369 the english
again invested the rock, this time under the command of robert knolles.
(tarde, who spelt all english names as he had heard them pronounced in the
country, writes robert canole.) the place was then so well defended, and
success appeared so far off to the partisans of edward iii., that the siege
was raised in despair at the end of a month; and the annalist goes on to
say that the english then marched into the quercy and took roc-amadour.
domme, however, fell into the english power again; but in 1415 it was once
more in the hands of the french. then we read that the seneschal sent
the crier into the public place to proclaim '_de par le roy_' that every
inhabitant of domme was forbidden to leave the town with the intention of
living elsewhere, under the penalty of having any property that he might
possess in the town confiscated. the motive of this ordinance is explained
as follows: 'the wars had already rendered the country so desolate, that at
domme, where the ordinary number of inhabitants who were heads of families
was a thousand, there were now no more than a hundred and twenty. the
people who had left had abandoned everything, and gone to spain or
elsewhere.'

from the bare and windy hill i went down again into the quiet valley,
where, when a few more miles were left behind, i came to la roque-gageac,
a village at the foot of high-reaching rocks of fantastic outline, not far
from the dordogne. many houses long ago seem to have climbed far up the
warm limestone under the shelter of cornice and canopy, fashioned by the
sculptor time, braving all the storms of centuries, and the danger of being
hurled in fragments towards the valley by some falling crag.

in an open space, forming a little square, a man and a woman were holding
down a pig, one at each end of a board, where the animal had been stretched
out against its inclination, while a third person had the knife ready for
action. and the spot chosen for the execution was immediately in front of
a very old and interesting shrine, with gabled roof, surmounted by a rude
gothic crucifix. i caught a glimpse of the pale statue and the flowers
before it; but only a glimpse, for the struggles of the doomed pig, and the
momentary expectation of seeing the red stream gush forth, made me turn
away. one sees much that is anything but poetical in the romantic land of
the troubadours.

near this strikingly-picturesque village is a cave such as one might read
of in a story of fanciful adventure. it is in a rock beside the dordogne,
where, the river rests in a deep pool. the entrance is under water, and it
can only be reached with safety by a good diver when, the sun shining at a
certain hour, and the light striking in a particular way, the passage into
the cavern is lit up. a boy had made the dive successfully not long before
my visit to this place, but he found so much to interest him in the cave
while it was lighted a little by the borrowed gleam from the water, that he
lingered there until, the sun moving on his course, the angle of refraction
suddenly changed. the child had not the courage to take a plunge into the
dark gulf, where there was no beacon to guide him, and where he might have
struck against the rock. he therefore remained the rest of the day and all
night in the cavern. when the sun again lit up the passage leading from his
prison, the boy plunged, and a few seconds afterwards he was sitting on the
river-bank drying himself in the sun.

         *       *       *       *       *

i have entered upon the tenancy of a small house beside the dordogne at
beynac, a village a few miles below la roque, partly crouching beneath a
very high rock, and partly built upon its terraces or ledges up to the
inner wall of a feudal castle that was much modified and refashioned in
later ages under the pressure of two forces--time, that ruins, and the
eternal striving of each generation to attain its own ideal of comfort and
elegance. but the grand old keep still rears its rectangular mass behind
and far above the later masonry, and when the evening sun shines upon it,
the stones, no longer gray, wear again their bright colour of six or seven
centuries ago. presently, as the glow moves higher, the battlements and
machicolations take a golden clearness that marks every detail against the
blue depth of sky whose fire is fading and preparing to change into the
calm splendour that mingles with the dusk. between the base of the rock and
the river is just space enough for a road, which is dazzlingly white now,
and well powdered with dust; but in winter it not infrequently disappears
under water.

[illustration: beynac.]

on the opposite shore, above a shelving beach of yellow pebbles and a
broken line of osiers, stretch meadows that are intensely green in spring,
and would be quickly so again if rain were to fall; but now they are very
brown, and the long-tailed sheep that wander over them, tinkling their
bells, like to keep near the dordogne, where they can moisten their mouths
from time to time, and thus help themselves to imagine that they are eating
grass. beyond the reach of meadow, almost at the foot of high wooded hills
which mark the boundary of the valley on that side, is a modern chateau;
but the architect found his model for it in the past, when castles were
more picturesque than comfortable. when the amber-tinted towers are seen
through the haze of a summer morning against the background of wooded hill,
one thinks that in just such a castle as this tasso or spenser would have
put an enchantress, whose wiles, combined with the indolent influence of
the valley, few pilgrim knights taking the eastward way to roc-amadour
would have been able to resist.

i found the valley so hot in the steady blaze of summer that, having
reached beynac, i felt no inclination to go any farther. i thought i would
stop there until cooler weather came, and live meanwhile principally in the
dordogne. several families from different parts of perigord had already
come here to spend a mildly exciting and not too costly river season; and
there they were, fathers, mothers, sons and daughters, splashing in the
blue tepid water, with their clothes laid carefully in little heaps upon
the pebbly beach or upon the brown grass by the osiers. despising the
shelter which in more fashionable watering-places is thought indispensable,
they lazily undressed and dressed in the open air with an appreciation of
sunshine and regardlessness of apparel that was almost lizard-like in its
freedom from conventional restraint.

i was charmed by the spectacle as i meditated upon the opposite bank. the
more i meditated the better i liked the idea of tarrying in a spot where
arcadian simplicity of life was so unaffectedly cultivated. i resolved that
i, too, would take a house at beynac if there was one to be had, and that i
would have what i figuratively termed my 'caravan' brought up here. at the
auberge--the only one in the place--i learnt that there was but a single
house still vacant, and that it was not a very beautiful one. a young
fisherman started off barefoot to fetch the owner from his village, four
miles away. the country had to be scoured for him, so that it was long
before he showed himself.

while waiting, i went out and amused the fish in the dordogne by pointing
a borrowed rod at them, and tempting them with the fattest house-flies i
could find; but as soon as they saw the bait they all turned their tails
to it. my angling was a complete failure. and yet there were multitudes of
fish swimming on the surface; the water seemed alive with them. i concluded
that they were observing a solemn fast.

at length the fisherman returned, looking very hot and dusty, and of course
thirsty. he was accompanied by a hard-baked man of about sixty--a peasant,
apparently, but one who had put on his best clothes in view of an important
bargain that was to be made. he had cunning little eyes, and a mouth that
seemed to have acquired from many ancestors, and from the habits of a
lifetime, a concentrated expression of rustic chicanery which told me that
no business was to be done with him without a fight.

he led the way to his house, which was on the road just above the river. i
came to terms with him for a month, after the expected fight; but it
was not until he had gone away that i began to realize that i had not
distinguished myself by my wisdom in this transaction. even the villagers,
who are not dainty in the matter of lodging, described the house as a
_baraque_. it gave me the same impression when i saw the inside of it; but
i closed my eyes to its drawbacks, because i had taken a fancy to beynac,
and this was the only furnished dwelling to be obtained there. i thought
all the little drawbacks belonging to it, such as the rustic hearth to cook
upon, pots with holes in them, rusty frying-pans, deficiency of crockery,
and more than a sufficiency of fleas, would be overcome somehow, as they
had been elsewhere during my peregrinations in out-of-the-way districts,
where the traveller who nurses his dignity, and has a proper regard for the
comforts of life, never thinks of stopping. but things did not settle down
this time quite so quickly as i had expected.

after the arrival of the 'caravan' i took to fishing--always with the same
rod borrowed of the blacksmith-innkeeper--with a zeal that i had not known
since i was a boy. i found that things settled down better when i was out
of the way. but there was something that settled down only too rapidly.
this was the kitchen floor. there was a bare rock forming the back wall of
the house, and down it a runnel of water gently trickled. in the wet season
it lost all modesty, made a lake that rose above the boards, and tried to
find an exit by the back of the chimney. this explained why the fire needed
two days' coaxing and blowing before it would burn, notwithstanding that
our servant had been reared in the knowledge of such chimney-places and
their humours. it also explained why somebody's foot went through the floor
in a fresh place two or three times a day. at the end of the first week
one had to stride or jump over half a dozen chasms to get from one side to
another. about the same time four or five of the lower stairs gave way from
rottenness, so that it needed no little agility to reach the bedrooms.
the old man had to come and mend his house, and because he had a guilty
conscience he brought a basket of figs with him; but, instead of owning
that the wood was rotten, he insinuated that it had been maliciously danced
upon.

but the heat was the worst tribulation. the house, with all its windows
without _persiennes_--a detail i had quite overlooked--faced the south, so
that during the hottest hours of the day the sun was full upon it, and the
heat was over one hundred degrees fahrenheit in the shade. it was the most
scorching august that had been known even in the south of france for years.
the recollection of those burning hours in that shanty will be ever green.

nevertheless, the time spent at beynac left some pleasant memories. the
days were fiery, and, when the south wind blew, almost suffocating; but
when the sun went down into the west there usually came a beneficent
change. during the few minutes that the golden circle lay seemingly upon
the edge of the world, a boat crossing the river appeared to glide over
unfathomable depths of splendour; then gradually over the fields of maize
and tobacco, and where the yellow stubble of the corn long since reaped had
been left, there spread the deep-toned lustre of evening. as the brown dusk
filled the valley, and under the sombre walnut-trees the wayside cross
became like the spectre of one, shrill voices of old women were heard
calling the geese and turkeys that still lingered in the fields.

the geese were often left to come home by themselves, after spending the
day along the banks of the river. they belonged to various people, but,
being eminently sociable birds, they started off together in flocks of
fifty or more. although there must have been causes of jealousy and rivalry
among them, they never seemed to quarrel. they knew when it was time to go
home by the failing light, and in the dusk i often met them marching along
the road like a regiment of soldiers. as they reached houses to which some
of them belonged, detachments would fall out and the others would go
on. every bird would return to the place which had for it the sweet
associations of its gosling innocence.

it is now night--the calm summer night without a moon, but spangled with
stars. among those which the dordogne reflects and holds as if they were
its own, is the planet mars, which gleams readily in the midst of a swarm
of lesser yellow lights. the river here is broad and still; there is not
ripple enough to make a beam tremble. if the stars in the water flash, it
is because the rays are flashed from above. just below the village there
are rapids, and a faint murmur comes up from them, but it is borne under by
the shrilling of the crickets that have climbed into the osiers and poplars
all along by the water's edge. now and again there is a great splash in the
middle of the stream, which makes one think that a fish large enough to
swallow some unsuspecting jonah of perigord must be there in a playful
mood; but this is merely the effect upon the imagination of a sudden noise
breaking in upon the monotonous sounds of the night which are so much like
silence.

lured by the freshness of the air and the serene glory of the starlit sky,
i wander off down the valley to a spot where the river, all in turmoil,
washes and wears away the flanks of rocks rising sheer from its bed like a
wall. looking back, i can see very distinctly the dark mass of the castle
and the church by its side high above me against the sky, and every minute
or so the lightning-flash from a storm far away in the west brightens the
sombre masonry and the rock beneath.

centuries ago in this light, the rock, the fortress, and its church must
have looked much the same as now. an englishman, who had campaigned with
the black prince, standing where i am--the road was probably a mule track
then---would have seen against the sky the picture that sets me dreaming of
the past. but the quietude of the summer night might have been disturbed
by sounds that are not heard now. it is unlikely that so large a castle,
containing so many men-at-arms and officials as must have been deemed
necessary to its safety and dignity, would at this early hour have been
wrapped in silence more complete than that of the valley. there would
surely have been some people breathing the cool air on the platform of the
keep besides the watchman, some soldiers pacing the _chemin de ronde_,
although peaceful days may have returned to the unlucky land of guyenne;
and the clamour of strong voices would have come down to the river. but now
the castle is quiet as its rock which was beaten by the waves of a vanished
sea, and those who still live in it are like the keepers of a cemetery.
that _donjon_, whose dark form seems to stand amidst the stars, only serves
to mark one of the many tombs of feudalism which rise above the smiling but
capricious dordogne like menhirs--monuments of older illusions--along the
ocean-scalloped coast of brittany.

animated as beynac became late in the afternoon, when the little society,
composed of extraneous particles, met in costumes that were airy,
fantastic, elementary, anything but ceremonious, to exchange civilities in
the water, life on the whole was so mildly exciting that when one day a
small caravan, drawn by a donkey and preceded by a young man half hidden by
a great straw hat and wildly beating a drum, entered the place, there was a
great and tumultuous movement of the population. everybody wanted to know
what the donkey and the young man proposed to do at beynac. on the caravan
had been painted '_theatre de la gaite_,' which threw light upon the object
of the intruders. the donkey drew up in front of the inn, and the excited
crowd waited with ill-contained impatience to see the company of players
descend from the battered travelling trunk on wheels. at length a pretty
little girl of about twelve, with large and lustrous brown eyes, came out
of the box. she was the company. she was in the charge of her mother,
who superintended the artistic arrangements, as well as the culinary and
financial, but did not venture upon the stage. the young man looked after
the donkey and the drum, and filled up his time by catching fish for the
company and her mother. the stable of the auberge was hired for evening use
as a _salle de spectacle_, and at one end a very diminutive stage was set
up by means of rough planks and old pieces of carpet.

everybody who could afford to spend a penny or twopence upon vanity and
worldliness went to see the performance. it was quite a fashionable
gathering. the best society were by common consent allowed to take the best
seats--very hard benches--the less ambitious crowded behind, with minds
fully made up not to allow themselves to be carried by enthusiasm beyond
the expenditure of two sous when the plate went round; while favoured
children, who were not expected to pay anything, because they had nothing,
climbed into the mangers, and packed themselves as close together as aphids
on a rose-stalk. the stable had been carefully cleansed, but the horsey
odour that belonged to it could not be swept out. this, with the bad
ventilation, and a temperature almost equal to the hatching of eggs without
hens, was a drawback; but the audience was in no humour to be critical. a
small handbell was rung, two pieces of old carpet were drawn back, and the
little girl made her bow to the audience in a costume as near to that of
mignon as she and her mother could make it. she sang:

  'connais-tu le pays ou fleurit l'oranger?'

and other airs from the opera in a small, bird-like voice, unaccompanied
by any music. for three hours the child sang, acted, and danced in the
suffocating stable, lighted by two petroleum lamps. the next day i saw
mignon sitting on one of the shafts of the caravan and gnawing the
'drumstick' of a fowl. the child-actress was the prop of her mother and the
donkey; her talent also kept the youth, who began to agitate the nerves of
beynac with his diabolical _rataplan_ hours before each performance.

one morning, soon after sunrise, the donkey, which had begun to think that
this time it had really been pensioned off, was put into the shafts, and
the caravan gradually disappeared upon the white road. then the village
became quite dull again; but it was roused from its torpor by the annual
fete. this was the chief event of the year. the peasants came in from the
scattered villages and from the isolated farms lying in the midst of the
chestnut woods. all the women coifed themselves with their best
kerchiefs, the heads of most of the young girls being resplendent with
brilliant-coloured silk. this coiffure resembles that of the bordelaise,
but it is not so small, nor is it folded so coquettishly. there was much
love-making--sometimes exquisitely comic by its rustic naivete--and
there was a good deal of dancing to the maddening music of two screaming
hurdy-gurdies.

at beynac i made the acquaintance of a french-man who, after angling for
riches--a sport at which he lost much bait and caught nothing--turned all
his attention to the fish in the dordogne. he resolved that he would run
no more risk by casting his bread upon the wider waters, but that he would
make the most of what remained to him by withdrawing to some riverside
nook, where his love of the unconventional, and his taste for a free life
in the open air, could expand, emancipated from all servitude to society,
including the necessity of keeping up what is called 'an appearance.'

what, to my mind, helps greatly to make france such a pleasant country to
live in is the large amount of social liberty that one enjoys there. except
in great towns, and in those places which are thronged at certain seasons
by cosmopolitan crowds, people can live as simply as they please, and they
can wear anything, however cheap or even shabby, without risk of being
diminished on this account in the opinion of others. they are liked or
disliked, respected or despised, as their conduct and dealings become known
and judged.

the otter--this nickname had been given to my new acquaintance by those who
were jealous of his fishing skill--when he was out in his boat never wore
anything finer than corduroy trousers, a short blue jacket of the cotton
material from which blouses are made, a straw-hat, and _espadrilles_,
into which he put his bare feet. no heavier clothing is consistent with
happiness in such a climate as that of the dordogne valley during the
summer months. when, by gliding over the transparent water, which revealed
the pebbles at the bottom almost in the deepest places, and the shoals of
fish as they passed up and down the stream, the temptation to plunge became
irresistible, the blue jacket and the other garments were thrown off in a
few seconds, and the fish were startled by the descent of a black head and
beard, followed by the rest of that human form which carlyle has compared
to a forked radish.

sometimes the otter made nocturnal expeditions far up the channels of the
little streams that fall into the dordogne. then he was after crayfish.
the ordinary method of catching these crustaceae, namely, with a piece of
netting covering a small wire hoop, and baited with meat, had little charm
for him. there was another much more in keeping with his passion for
movement. he would walk up the beds of the streams quite heedless of the
water, holding in one hand a lantern, and having the other free to make a
grab at every crayfish he might see scuttling out of harm's way over the
stones or sand. as he went slowly up the narrow valleys, the gleam of
his lantern through the osiers, the tall loose-strife and hemp-agrimony
startled the owls, the hedgehogs and the weasles; but not the sound of
water wailing in the darkness, nor the cries of disturbed animals, nor
the weird blackness of overhanging trees that hid the stars, troubled his
nerves. on he went, through water-meadows, at the bottom of gloomy little
gorges, and by the fringe of the forest, until he had wandered miles away
from beynac. we very nearly met one night, both being out with the same
object in view. i, however, had very little of his zeal for the sport, and
was less interested by the crayfish than by the fantastic indistinctness
of trees and shrubs and flowers, which, in the light of the stars and the
lantern, seemed to belong to a world with which i was but vaguely familiar,
although i had travelled all over it in dreams.

sometimes i used to go out fishing with the otter on the dordogne. when
the casting-net was left at home (it was of little use when the water was
clear) chub-fishing with the flying-line was generally the chosen form
of sport. here i may say that my companion, who could turn his hand
to anything, made his own rods from hazel-sticks. where the water was
sufficiently deep, the boat was rowed and steered with a single-bladed
paddle, but where it was shallow much better progress could be made by
polling. these are the two methods invariably used by the fishermen and
ferrymen of the dordogne, and it is astonishing with what success they can
get a boat up the rapids without having recourse to the towing-line.

when we went chub-fishing, we took the boat a mile or so up-stream, and
then let it drift down with the current near a bank that was fringed with
willows and acacias. although we needed only six inches of water, the depth
was sometimes miscalculated, and we went aground on a bank of pebbles. then
the otter, whose bare feet were always ready for such emergencies, stepped
out into the sparkling current, and hauled or pushed the boat over the
obstacle. what with rapids and banks of pebbles, the excitement of boating
on the dordogne above lalinde never flags. it looked very easy to throw a
line with a worm on it towards the shore, and then draw it back, but the
chub showed such little eagerness to be caught by me that i generally
preferred to steer and watch my companion pulling them out as he stood in
the prow, his face nearly hidden under the thatch of his straw hat. when
the fish were in a biting humour, he had one on his hook every time he
threw the line.

there are few trout in this part of the dordogne, but in tributary streams,
like the charming little ceou, they are plentiful. carp are abundant, but
they are very difficult to take with the line, and even with the net,
except in time of flood, when they get washed out of their holes, and the
water being no longer clear, their very sharp eyes are of little use
to them. then a lucky throw will sometimes bring out two or three carp
weighing several pounds each. the fish commonly caught are mullet, perch,
barbel, gudgeon, bream, and chub. as a food-supplying river, the dordogne
is one of the most valuable in france, and, owing to the rapid current and
the purity of the water, the fish is of excellent quality.

the fixed belief of all the riverside people in this and other valleys is
that fish should be cooked alive. you enter an inn and ask for a _friture_
of gudgeon. in a few minutes you see the victims, which have been pulled
out of a tank with a small net on the end of a stick, jumping on the
kitchen table, and they are still jumping when they go into the boiling
grease. i am not among those who have grown callous to such sights, common
as they are in france. to see fish scraped, opened, and cooked while still
alive gives me disgust for it when it afterwards appears on the table. i
can imagine somebody saying: 'why look at what goes on in the kitchen?'
that somebody does not quite understand what rural france is. in a country
inn we invariably pass through the kitchen to reach the room set apart for
guests, and it has often fallen to my lot to seek rest, shelter, and food
in a poor auberge, where the kitchen is also the common room of the family
and outsiders.

a beynac character that left on my memory a lasting impression was old
suzette. suzette might have been any age between fifty and seventy. she had
no beauty, but she must have had a little vanity left, for when i showed
her a photograph i had taken of her, she put her hard old hands together,
swayed her head from shoulder to shoulder, and actually wept. she could not
speak much french, but she said as well as she could that she did not know
that she had grown so ugly. i have noticed, however, that my photographs
have a tendency to draw tears or angry expressions from most of those on
whom i operate, which i can only account for by the reason that these
people have not the pleasure of paying for their portraits. what is
done for nothing is seldom appreciated. suzette, not wishing to hurt my
feelings, soon wiped out her eyes with her largest knuckle, and, having
composed her countenance, thanked me for having photographed her. she
had had a rough life, but as she had known little else but hardship and
privation, she was contented with what providence considered enough for
her. this was now a two-roomed cottage to live in, and for food a bunch of
grapes, a peach or a pear to eat with her bread in the fruit season, a few
walnuts to go with it in autumn or winter, chestnuts to boil or roast, and
a piece of fat bacon hanging to a beam, from which she cut only just enough
at a time to disguise the water which, when thickened with bread, a handful
of haricots, and some scraps of other vegetables, made her daily soup. she
was a widow now, but although whenever she spoke of her dead husband her
head began to wag and the tears to start from her eyes, she had less care
and worry and pain as a lonely woman than when she was bearing children
and working harder than any pack-mule to bring them up. her husband was a
fisherman of the dordogne, and she sold his fish in the sarlat market, some
eight miles distant from where they lived by the river. in order to be
early in the market, she had to start at about two in the morning, and the
road, which was uphill all the way, ran between woods where the wolves,
descending from the vaster forests of black perigord, often howled in
winter. she told me it frequently happened when she reached the market that
her arms and hands were so benumbed with the cold that she could not take
the basket of fish from her head. as a widow, she had lived for a while
with a married son, but the young woman soon turned the old one out. poor
suzette told the story without bitterness; she recognised the law of nature
in this expulsion of the mother when she was of no further use to her
children, and accepted thankfully the ten francs a month which her son
allowed her. she managed to live by fetching and carrying for anyone who
would give her two or three sous for an hour's trudging. she used to take
my letters to post at the nearest railway-station, and no one who merely
noted how nimbly her bare feet moved along the hot, dusty road would have
supposed that she had left her youth so far behind her. battered and
pinched and harassed as she had been by destiny, she still believed in the
working out of eternal justice, and one day before sunrise she started off
on a pilgrimage to a distant sanctuary, and did not return until after many
hours. with all this she was gay, and could tell a lively story with plenty
of southern salt. she was a good bit of human nature, worth studying.

sarlat, where old suzette went to sell her husband's fish, was a very
important stronghold of black perigord in the middle ages, and the chief
place in that sarladais which the english kings of norman and angevin
descent found such a tough bone to pick. the way to it from beynac leads up
steep valleys and gorges, covered with dense forest. here wolves are to be
seen occasionally in winter, but the wolf country begins a little to the
north of sarlat, and stretches towards the limousin. the town appears to be
composed of one long street, and to be dismally uninteresting. there is,
however, an old sarlat that lies a little off the main artery, and which a
lazy visitor who does not like the trouble of asking questions might easily
miss. there are few scenes more original and picturesque in france than
that presented by the ruinous old church, half open to the weather, and
the ancient houses that form a framework round it. under the lofty gothic
vaulting are wooden shops and shanties, and, looking up, you see the smoke
from bakers' ovens hanging about the ribs of the great arches, which it has
blackened.

of the old houses, one of the most remarkable is that which was the
residence of the philosophical writer, etienne de la boetie, the friend
of montaigne, it is an interesting example of the french renaissance, the
exterior being richly ornamented with carvings.

a very rough, bad time had the men of sarlat during the long years that
they were fighting intermittently for their lives and property with the
lawless bands of so-called english, who had turned so many rocks into
fastnesses, and who issued from their fortified caverns, that they made
almost impregnable, to prey upon the unfortunate people who strove to live
by husbandry. these hardened ruffians and freebooters had no respect for
treaties, and inasmuch as peace never lasted long, and the english kings
of that epoch always liked to feel that they were ready for anything that
might happen in france, the companies of brigand soldiers who preferred to
serve under the leopards rather than under the golden lilies were left to
do pretty much what they pleased in the wilder parts of guyenne.

after the treaty that followed the battle of poitiers they continued their
depredations, heedless of the orders communicated to them by the english
commissioners. they carried their raids up to the walls of sarlat, even at
the time of vintage, although this season was much respected in the middle
ages by violent men, from a motive that was perhaps not disinterested. they
seized the bullocks that were harnessed to the waggons, and bore them off
to their strongholds. it is but fair to add, however, that the sarladais
did not formally submit to english authority until 1361--five years after
the battle of poitiers. then chandos went to sarlat and received the
submission of the burghers. soon afterwards edward iii confirmed all the
privileges they had been enjoying under the kings of france. but they did
not remain quiet long. persuaded by talleyrand and other nobles, they
rebelled in 1369, and the town became again french. speaking of this event,
tarde observes:

'and behold how and when the salamander [footnote: this reptile was borne
in the arms of sarlat.] was again placed under the three fleurs-de-lys,
having carried the leopards in chief only eight years two months and a
half.'

the people of sarlat often boast that their town never submitted to the
english. in this matter, however, they are in error.

september came, and i was still at beynac, although i had found another
house. the fruit season was then at its height. peaches were sold at three
sous the dozen, a good melon cost about the same sum, and figs were to be
had almost for nothing. on these terms quite a mountain of fruit could be
placed upon the table for half a franc. there was often no necessity to run
into this extravagance, for the people at beynac are good-natured, and they
would frequently send a basket of their earliest grapes or other fruit.
although the present might have been made by a woman with bare feet, her
feelings would have been hurt had money been offered in return.

one day rather late in the month, having grown ashamed of inactivity, i
carried my knapsack down to the river and put it into the otter's smallest
boat, which he called the _perissoire_, although it was not really a canoe.
he was the chief builder of it, and as a contrivance for bringing home
to man the solemn truth that life hangs to a thread or floats upon a
plank--perhaps the worst state of the two--it certainly did him infinite
credit. it was a flatbottomed outrigged deal boat, very long, and so narrow
that to look over one's shoulder in it was a manoeuvre of extreme delicacy,
especially where the rapids caused the water to be in wild commotion. i was
told that it would go down stream like an arrow, and so it did. there was
no need to row hard, for the current took the fragile skiff along with it
so fast that the trees on the banks sped by as if they were running
races, and every few minutes brought a change of landscape. it was very
delightful; only one sensation of movement could have been better--that of
flying.

the water was as blue as the sky above, and over the valley, the wooded
hills, and naked rocks lay the sunshine of early autumn, tender in its
strength, mingling a balm with its burning. i seemed to be floating swiftly
but gently down some lovely but treacherous river of enchanted land. and
where is the river that lends itself better to this illusion than
the dordogne--ever charming, changing, and luring like a capricious,
fascinating, and rather wicked woman? now it flows without a sound by
the forest, where the imagination places the fairy people and the sylvan
deities; now it roars in the shadow of the castle-crowned and savage rock,
over which the solitary hawk circles and repeats its melancholy cry; now it
seems to sleep like a blue lake in the midst of a broad, fair valley, where
in the sunny fields the flocks feed drowsily.

the depth of the water was as variable as the strength of the current.
sometimes i saw the stony bed seven or ten feet below, and then quite
suddenly the boat would get into rushing water that sparkled with crystal
clearness over a bank of pebbles, and i expected momentarily to hear a
grating noise and to feel myself aground; but the little boat went over the
shallows like a leaf. i passed a bank large enough to be called an island.
the water had not covered it for months, and it was all thickly overgrown
with persicaria, which the late summer had stained a carmine red, so that
the island was all aflame. the swallows that dipped their wings in the
water, the kingfishers that flew along the banks or perched on the willow
stumps, and the graceful wagtails, were for some miles my only river
companions--excepting, of course, the fish, with which a treacherous
current or a sunken rock might have placed me at any moment on terms of
still closer intimacy.

but time flew like the boat, and i soon came in sight of a charming little
village whose houses with peaked roofs seemed to have been piled one
upon another. here upon stones in the water i recognised the human form
supported by two bare legs, and in the posture as of a person about to take
a dive, which is not perhaps very graceful, but is one that certainly lends
character to the riverside scenery of france. two or three women were
rinsing their linen.

on nearing st. cyprien the current became swifter and the turmoil of the
rapids so great that i prepared my mind here to being swamped by the waves.
the question whether i would abandon or try to rescue my knapsack after the
wreck was distressing. the risk being over, it was with a sigh of relief
that i beached the boat, now half full of water, at the nearest spot to the
small town. having moored it and given the sculls in charge of a man whose
house was close by, i was soon walking in the warm glow of the september
afternoon by cottage gardens where the last flowers of summer were
blooming.

the small burg of less than three thousand inhabitants which bears the name
of the african saint was probably, like many others, much more important in
the middle ages than it is now. in accordance with the building spirit
of the past, so strongly pronounced throughout aquitaine, and obviously
inspired by a defensive motive, the houses are closely packed together on a
steep hillside. a few ancient dwellings, notably one with a long exterior
gallery, show themselves very picturesquely here and there. the town grew
up at the foot of an abbey, of which the church still existing exhibits a
massive tower that might easily be mistaken at a little distance for an
early feudal keep. the lower part of this tower is romanesque. the interior
of the church is in the very simple pointed style of the twelfth century,
but the interest has suffered much from restoration. what is chiefly
remarkable here is the carved oak of the reredoses and pulpit.

the english in 1422 took the town of st. cyprien and besieged the abbey,
which was a veritable citadel where the inhabitants in the last resort
found shelter. a french force coming, however, to the relief of the people,
the english, who were probably not very numerous, deemed it prudent to
retire.

there being still an hour or more of daylight, i continued the ascent of
the hill above the houses and the solemn old church to find a certain
chateau de pages, which i knew to be somewhere in the locality. a woman
working her distaff and spindle with that meditative air which the rustic
spinners so often have, her bare feet slowly and noiselessly moving over
the rough stones, pointed out to me a little lane that wound up the
deserted hill between briars bedecked with scarlet hips and bits of ancient
wall to which ferns and moss and ivy clung, tinged by the waning golden
light. i passed through vineyards from which the grapes had been gathered,
then rose by broom and blackthorn to the level land.

i looked in vain for the castle. i might have searched for it until
darkness came, but for the help of a boy who was taking home a goat. at
length i found it lying in a hollow, a sufficient sign that it was never
a stronghold. in feudal times it was probably a small castellated manor
belonging perhaps to a knight who could not afford to build himself a
_donjon_ on some eminence and to fortify it with walls; but centuries later
what remained of the original structure was patched up and considerably
enlarged. now, as i saw it in the dusk, it seemed a very ghost-haunted
place. the building had not fallen into ruin; it was still roofed, and
might easily have been made habitable; but there was no glass in the
windows; all the rooms were silent with that silence so deep and sad of the
long-deserted house which is not sufficiently wrecked by time and decay
to have lost the pathos of human associations. the breath of the dying
twilight stirred the ivy leaves upon the wall of the detached chapel where
never a person had prayed for many a year, and the goblin bats came out
from the shadowy places to flutter against the pale sky. then i felt that
i had lingered long enough on this desolate spot, and the thought of the
awaking hearths brightening the little town with the blaze of wood made me
hasten through the heather and gorse that had grown up on the grave of many
a vine.

the next morning saw me afloat again. as i was getting away from the shore
a man called out to me: 'your boat is worth nothing! if you try to pass the
third bridge you will go to the bottom!'

he spoke very seriously, and i wished to take further counsel of him; but
having once got into the current, it carried me off at such a rate that
while i was thinking of putting a question i was taken out of speaking
distance. i shot through one of the arches of the first bridge, and soon
found myself in water that was a little rough for my poor skiff. here were
the rapids again. i had been warned against these before i left the inn.
there was no turning back now, and if the commotion of water had been ever
so great i should have had to take my chance in it. the otter's advice
when i came to rapids was to pull as hard as i could in the middle of the
current. i followed it, and my shallow boat, which had just been described
as worthless, darted into the midst of the turmoil, and went through it
all as swift as a swallow on the wing. the river, however, had risen
considerably during the night, and the strength of the current having much
increased in consequence, my belief in the _perissoire's_ worthiness was
not sufficient to make me run the risk of being swamped at the third
bridge. i therefore landed at the next one, which was close to the village
of siorac. it seemed that i had only just started from st. cyprien, and yet
i had travelled about six miles. with the help of a willing man the boat
was carried to the railway-station, which was not far off, and its journey
home having been paid, i ceased for awhile to be a waterfarer, and became
again a wayfarer.

although there was not much to interest me at siorac, i stayed there to
lunch in a small inn, where an old woman grilled me a chop over the embers,
and then set before me a pile of grapes, another of pears, and a third of
fresh walnuts. the fruit was to me the best part of the meal, for the long
hot summer had caused me to look upon meat very much as a necessary evil in
the routine of life. while i was seated at the table, the old woman, who
now dozed over her distaff in the chimneycorner, would start up every five
minutes or so, as if from the beginning of a nightmare, and rush at the
flies, which were ravenously busy upon the grapes and pears that i had set
aside for them. she hated them with a hatred so fierce and bitter that i
thought it rather unbecoming at her time of life.

'_on ne pent rien manger,_' she said, '_sans que ces diables y touchent._'

this was quite true; but it was not the flies' fault that their parents
were prolific, and that they had been hatched in a climate eminently
conducive to their vigour and happiness. their numbers and their voracity
showed that they, too, were compelled by the struggle for life to be active
and enterprising. unlike some beings of a higher order, they did not take
this trouble sadly; but, then, they were southern flies.

having driven them from the table, the aged woman nodded her head with
vindictive satisfaction, and murmured, '_c'est egal; elles vont bientot
crever_'--unmindful of the fact that she, too, had reached the season of
life when the frost comes suddenly and catches people unawares.

i returned to the river and crossed the bridge. on one side of it was a
high statue of the madonna and child, with these words on the pedestal:
'_protectrice du pont, priez pour nous._.' the inscription further stated
that the statue was raised in remembrance of the flood of 1866. that was
in the time of the empire; nowadays the government despises all heavenly
assistance in the department of roads and bridges, and religious statues
are no longer erected in such places. just before reaching a village
called coux, i was confronted by a very large army of geese, and while the
foremost row advanced to the attack with outstretched necks and bills laid
near the ground, the others cheered them on. for a minute or so matters
looked very serious; then goose and gander courage failed completely, until
the army worked round to my rear, when the screams of defiance arose again.

poor wretches! their high spirits were not going to last long. they would
soon have to undergo the cramming process, which a goose detests, for,
unlike a pig, it will never of its own will eat more than it needs. in a
few weeks the livers of most of them would be made into those excellent
truffled _pates de foie gras_, which it is the pride and profit of perigord
to send far and wide.

a grand old elm, such as one does not often see in france, stood in front
of the village church--a transition building with a romanesque portal.
beyond this place the land became marshy, and considerable tracts of it had
been planted with jerusalem artichokes, each of which had now its yellow
head that tells its relationship to the sunflower. these artichokes are
much grown by damp woodsides, and on other land of little value, in the
valleys of perigord. they are rarely used as food for man, for the french,
notwithstanding the wide range of their gastronomy, including as it does
squirrels and tomtits, and even snakes in certain localities, as well as
various herbs and vegetables seldom or never eaten in england, have not
been able to acquire a liking for the tubers of the artichoke. the plant
is cultivated for feeding cattle, the whole of it doing good service in a
region where there is but little grass. the multitude of golden flowers
floating, as it were, on sombre green waves light up the autumnal landscape
with a new flame when the skies turn gray.

a solitary man whom i found working a loom in a cottage by the side of the
river kept a ferryboat, and with his help i crossed again to the other
bank. wandering on with a somewhat vague purpose, i soon found myself--now
under a gray sky--on a marshy flat, which a backwater of the dordogne had
almost made an island. here there were many low shrubs of dwarf elder
covered with berries; pools, and wide ditches, where the dark water
scarcely moved, all fringed with tall reeds; while here and there was the
gleam of a white flower upon the erect stem of a marsh-mallow. but what
gave to this spot a strange and almost weird character was the number of
great hoary willows, thirty or forty feet high, with gnarled and twisted
boles, scattered over the dark green grass. it was a melancholy grove of
fantastic dream-haunted willows, such as belongs to the south and the
virgilian muse:

'umbrarum hic locus est, somni noctisque soporae.'

and the sad solitude, in which there was not a sound of moving leaf or
singing bird, seemed to be peopled by the ghosts of men who were waiting
and weeping out their hundred years on the stygian shore.

hoary willows, dark alders, and then the road. this led me to le buisson--a
place possessed of the blue devils, and which exists merely out of
compliment to the railway-junction here. having made arrangements for
returning to the inn, i wandered out again to look at the river in the gray
evening, and at the bridge where it was predicted that i should go to
the bottom if i remained in the little boat. i crossed fields from which
tobacco and maize had lately been carried, and reached the bridge of evil
prophecy. the river certainly seemed to be doing its best to sweep away the
piers, and when it escaped from the arches it raised its voice to a roar;
but it seemed to me that on one side the _perissoire_ would have gone
through gaily without being swamped. the cry of troubled water in the dusk
fascinated me. i lingered, and yet felt the strong impulse to hurry back to
the society of men, out of the sound of the angry river, whose slaty waves
flashed out strange gleams. what is it in the gloom and horror of nature
that so draws us and yet warns us to flee? the day was ending stormily. the
poplars wailed, and bent under the lash of the rising wind; dark masses of
cloud stood still in the sky, whilst others, torn and scattered below them,
rushed hither and thither madly. every few minutes the faint gleam of
lightning, still far off, brought to the black woods along the hills a
momentary return of radiance, as though it were the fitful flashing of the
day's dying lamp.

the roaring and wailing of the turbid flood now seemed to be repeating in
cruel mockery the despairing cries of all the drowning people who were ever
the prey of the water-fiends that draw downward in whirlpools to depths
where twilight passes into darkness, and take the form of the long waving
weeds that look so innocent, but whose grasp is deadly, or guide the
current that utters never a sound as it seizes its victim and bears him
into an unfathomed gulf under the pitiless rock. a voice within me cried
'home!' but home had i none anywhere of the staple sort: mine was like a
home on wheels.

as i returned to the inn across the fields, i saw some scattered peasant
figures moving slowly the same way under the wild sky; men with the ox
that was weary like themselves, women with bundles of forage on their
heads--melancholy forms or phantoms in the dusky air, at one with nature
in unconscious sympathy. then across the dim and dreary plain, where the
narrow path was lost to sight after the first few yards, a railway lamp
flashed like the large red eye of some unimaginable monster of the
primordial marsh.

in the morning i was on the road to cadouin. the air was keen and a little
frosty, for the hour was early. men were mowing the last crop of grass,
which was powdered with rime. after the meadows came the woods, for the
road went south, and was therefore carried over the hills which rise above
the valley of the dordogne. the woods were mainly of chestnut, and, under
the action of the storm, followed by the first frost, many a nut lay
shining on the road within its gaping prickly shell. after two or three
miles of ascent the road sloped downward, and it was not long before i
entered a very neat and trim little town, which, however, was altogether
village-like. this was cadouin, and in the centre stood its venerable
romanesque church. i entered the building, which was silent and very dim;
not a soul was there but myself. presently there was a moan in the tower,
which seemed so far away: the clock was striking one of the quarters. now
the dim light brightened suddenly, for the sun had risen high enough to
dart its rays through a window, and to flash upon a column the brilliant
colours of the glass. with the exception of the apse, which is purely
romanesque, the interior of this church is gothic of the transition; but
most of the capitals of the pier-columns have a plain romanesque outline.
there is no clerestory, the light being admitted from small round-headed
windows in the aisle walls. much of the building dates from the foundation
of the abbey of cadouin, in the early part of the twelfth century; but the
existing cloisters, which are what is most remarkable here, date from
the fifteenth century, and owe much of their interest to the partial
transformation of their style which they afterwards underwent when the
spirit of the renaissance set in. the gothic tracery of the arches that
face the quadrangle unites the strength of stone with the delicacy of
pencil drawing. in the late gothic and renaissance part, the ceilings
are richly and floridly groined, angelic and other figures forming the
termination of the low-reaching bosses, the groins converging in fan-like
order towards elaborately-carved canopies against the wall. at one end
of this wing is a doorway, the jambs and lintels of which are heavily
over-worked with carvings very typical of the exuberant fancy of the early
french renaissance.

[illustration: cloisters of the abbey of cadouin.]

for centuries cadouin was a famous place of pilgrimage, in consequence
of the claim laid by the abbey to the possession of the holy shroud. the
following is the history of the celebrated relic, according to jean tarde:

'in the year 1100 hugh, surnamed the great, brother of the king of france,
and bishop of le puy, in auvergne, having gone on a voyage beyond the seas
with godefrey de bouillon, found means, after the taking of jerusalem, to
recover this holy relic, and, dying in palestine, he left it in charge of a
priest, his chaplain. the priest falling ill on board ship, and perceiving
that his end was drawing near, gave the shroud into the hands of a clerk, a
native of perigord. he, after the death of his master, took a small barrel,
in the middle of which he placed a partition. in one half he put the sacred
sheet, and his drink in the other. in this manner he carried the relic back
to his native land, and placed it in a church near cadouin, of which he had
charge. fearing that someone might steal his treasure, he left it in the
barrel, which he put away in a chest near the altar, showing it only to a
few of the monks of cadouin. but one day, while he was absent, fire broke
out and gained the whole village. all that was in the church was consumed,
excepting the chest that contained the barrel. the monks of cadouin,
informed of the fire, hastened to the spot, and, having broken open the
chest, took away the barrel, and carried it to their own church. the clerk,
on his return, asked for what had been taken from him; but the monks said
that, inasmuch as they had risked their lives in saving it from the flames,
it belonged to them. the difference was arranged in this wise: the clerk
was received as a religious, and the keeping of the relic was entrusted to
him during his lifetime. he himself thought it safer there than in a rural
church.'

in 1392, when the country was distracted by the dynastic wars between the
crowns of france and england, the holy shroud was taken for safety to
toulouse. subsequently, the people of perigord wished to have it replaced
at cadouin, and the abbot and chapter of st. etienne at toulouse resisting,
much litigation ensued. in 1455 some monks of cadouin took it away by
stealth, and brought it back to their abbey. tarde mentions, among other
circumstances which tended to increase the importance of the abbey of
cadouin, '_les bienfaietz d'une reyne d'angleterre_'.

had it not been for other plans, i should have continued my journey
southward from cadouin as far as the chateau de biron, one of the most
instructive relics of the past in perigord, and have taken on my way
modieres, one of the english _bastides_ which edward i. farmed for ten
years; but i made my way back to the dordogne, with the intention of
ascending the valley of its tributary the vezere. i did not, however,
return to buisson, but took the road to ales, which lies a little lower
down the stream.

while i was recrossing the hills the sun warmed the world again, and led
back the trembling summer which had been scared by the early morning's
frost. the half-benumbed butterflies opened and shut their wings many times
upon the bramble leaves before they could bring themselves to believe that
that pinch of winter was only a joke. it seemed a cruel jest while the
bloom of honeysuckle was upon the hedges.

[illustration: chateau de biron: the lodge.]

at ales--a mere group of houses round a little old church with a broad
squat tower--i lunched in a very wretched inn. if a pig had not been killed
at an early hour that morning i should have been obliged to be satisfied
with vegetable and egg diet; and the knowledge that the pig had met with
such bad luck only a few hours before did not dispose me in favour of the
various dishes prepared from the external and internal parts of him. the
_aubergiste_ was an old boatman of the dordogne, who had steered many a
cargo of wine floating with him down-stream in time of partial flood; but
that was before the phylloxera had played havoc with the vines. now he had
to get along as well as he could by combining husbandry, pig-rearing, and
innkeeping.

on reaching the river again, i perceived that the annual descent of the
auvergnats had commenced. all the people who live by the higher waters of
the dordogne, whether they belong to the puy de dome, the cantal, or the
correze, are called auvergnats in perigord, or, rather, such of them as
come down the stream with their small barges laden with wood, when the
autumnal rains have commenced, and there is sufficient water in the river
for their purpose. sometimes, in their anxiety to turn their wood into
money, they start a little too early, and being misled by an increase of
the current which is not maintained, they go aground after a few days'
navigation. i have seen one of these boats stuck fast on a bank almost in
mid-stream, with the rapids nearly breaking over it with a roar that could
be heard a mile away. the wood is cut in the forests, which stretch almost
without a break for many a league on both sides of the upper dordogne, and
is seasoned, dressed, and shaped for barrel-making before it is put afloat.
the boats, which are some thirty or forty feet long, are necessarily
flat-bottomed, and are so roughly built that there are usually gaping
spaces between the planks, which are caked with moss. they are good enough
for the voyage, which is their first and last. the men return, but
never the boats. these are sold as firewood at libourne, when they have
discharged their cargoes. where the water is deep and comparatively quiet
the speed is increased by rowing with very long oars; but where the current
is strong the boat has only to be steered. this, however, is work that
needs thorough knowledge of the river.

the autumn is a merry time for these auvergnats. they look forward to it
during the long months that they are working in the woods. the annual
voyage to the bordelais gives them an opportunity of again seeing the old
friends whom they have been meeting for years at the waterside inns where
they frequently put up at night, because the descent of the dordogne in the
dark is rather too exciting. they always say that they will start again
in the morning at sunrise, but it often happens that the sun is very high
indeed before they are afloat. after all, an auvergnat is a man no less
than another, and because he lives on next to nothing eleven months in the
year is perhaps a reason why he should feel that he has earned the right
to let his sentiments expand, and to light the lamp of conviviality in his
breast during the remaining two or three weeks that he may be away from
home.

there is this, however, to be said: whatever money he may possess,
he trusts himself with very little when he goes off on his annual
river-voyage, and when he has sold his wood he is anxious to get out of
danger as quickly as possible.

i had to return some distance up-stream before i was able to cross to
limeuil. this is one of the most picturesque villages on the banks of the
dordogne. it is built on the side of an isolated rock, close to the point
where the vezere falls into the broader river. before crossing the bridge
i lingered awhile gazing at all those high-gabled roofs with red and
lichen-stained tiles rising from the blue water towards the blue sky; vine
trellises mingling their sunny green with the red of the roofs. where no
houses clung, the yellow rock was splashed with the now crimson sumach.

then i climbed the long street over the rock and cobble stones between
walls half green with pellitory, houses with high gables and rough wooden
balconies where geraniums shone in the shadow, and from which the trailing
plants hung low in that supreme luxuriance which is the beginning of their
death. a few old women sat at their doors spinning, and geese, in small
companies of three or four, waddled out of the way; but there was no sound
of any kind--limeuil was as silent as a cemetery. and yet there were cafes,
which gave the place a false air of liveliness. some tourists, attracted by
the caverns in the valley of the vezere, had possibly wandered as far as
limeuil; but where were the inhabitants now? had there been an epidemic,
and were the old women, whose heads were bent towards their knees while
they clutched their distaffs, the few survivors?

taking the road to bugues, i passed a small church with an open belfry
with a tiled roof supported by wooden pillars. it stood in a grove of tall
cypresses and weeping willows, and the gravestones lay scattered round
about. the waning sunshine seemed to fall more tenderly here than upon the
open fields where the ruddy pumpkins flamed. it was nearly dark when i
reached the little town of bugues.

[illustration: truffle-hunters.]




in the valley of the vezere.


the spring has come again, and i am now at les eyzies, in the valley of the
vezere: a paradise of exceptional richness to the scientific bone and flint
grubber on account of the very marked predilection shown for it by the men
of the stone age, polished and unpolished. it is about five in the morning,
and the woods along the cliffs are just beginning to catch the pale fire of
the rising sun. just outside my open window are about twenty chickens in
the charge of two mother hens, and as they have not been long awake, they
do their utmost to make a noise in the world like other creatures that are
empty. as soon as the neighbour's door is open they enter in a body, and
march towards the kitchen. a female voice is heard to address something
sharply to them in patois; there is a scuffle in the passage, and all the
chickens scream together as they rush before the broom into the road. this
is how the village day opens.

i am waiting for a man who has undertaken to show me some caverns in the
neighbouring rocks. meanwhile, another comes along, and makes mysterious
signs to me from the road. he is barefoot and ragged, and does not look as
if he had a taste for regular work, but rather as if he belonged to the
somewhat numerous class who live by expedients, and have representatives in
all ranks of society. he has a small sack in his hand, to which he points
while he addresses me in patois. i tell him to come in. the sack contains
crayfish, and now i know the reason of his mysterious air, for all
fishing is prohibited at this time, and he is running the gauntlet of the
_garde-peche_, who lives close by. the poor ragamuffin has been out all
night, wading in the streams, and his wife, who looks, if possible, more
eager and hungry than himself, is waiting near, keeping watch. he offers
his crayfish for three sous the dozen, and i buy them of him without
feeling that respect for the law and the spawning season which i know i
ought to have. but i have suffered a good deal from bad example. there was
a _procureur de la republique_ not far from here the other day, and the
first thing he asked for at the hotel was fish.

presently the other man--the one i am waiting for--shows himself. he is
a lean old soldier of the empire, with a white moustache, kept short and
stiff like a nailbrush. he is still active, and if he has any disease he is
in happy ignorance of it; nevertheless, he confides to me that it is in
the legs that he begins to feel his seventy-two years. his face has a very
startling appearance. it is so scratched and torn that it makes me think of
the man of the nursery-rhyme who jumped into the quickset-hedge; and, as
it turns out, this one was just such another, only his movement was
involuntary. he tells me how he came to be so disfigured. he was coming
home with some cronies, at a late hour, from one of those friendly society
meetings which in france, as in england, move the bottle as well as the
soul, when, owing to an irregularity of the road, for which he was in no
way to blame, he took an unintentional dive down a very steep bank, at the
bottom of which was a dense forest of brambles. as he was quite unable to
extricate himself, his companions, after a consultation, decided to haul
him up by the legs; and it was to this manner of being rescued that he
attributed most of the damage done to his ears.

[illustration: chateau des eyzies.]

we passed under the ruined castle of les eyzies, which was never very
large, because the shelf of rock on which it was built would not have
admitted of this; but when defended it must have been almost inaccessible.
the ruin is very picturesque, with the overleaning rock above, and the
clustered roofs below. the village is continued up the marshy valley of the
beuene, which here joins that of the vezere. in the face of the overleaning
rocks are orifices that strike the attention at once by their shape, which
distinguishes them from natural caverns. they have been all fashioned like
common doors or windows on the rectangular principle, which proves that
they are the artificial openings of human dwellings. the men who made their
homes in the side of the precipice, and who cut the rock to suit their
needs, must have let themselves down from the top by means of a rope. to
what age these troglodytes belonged nobody knows, but it is not doubted
that they came after the flint-working savages, whose implements are found
in the natural caverns and shelters near the ground.

we continued up the valley of the beuene. the banks under the rocks were
starred with primroses, and from the rocks themselves there hung with
cotoneaster the large and graceful white blossoms of that limestone-loving
shrub, the amelanchier. in the centre of the valley stretched the marsh,
flaming gold with flags and caltha, and dotted with white valerian. the
green frogs leapt into the pools and runnels, burying themselves in the
mud at the shock of a footstep; but the tadpoles sported recklessly in the
sunny water, for as yet their legs as well as their troubles were to come.
i confess that this long morass by the sparkling beuene, frequented by
the heron, the snipe, the water-hen, and other creatures that seek the
solitude, interested me more than the caverns which i had set out to see. i
nevertheless followed the old man into them, and tried to admire all that
he showed me; but there was not a stalactite six inches long the end of
which had not been knocked off with a stick or stone. the anger that
one feels at such mutilation of the water's beautiful work destroys the
pleasure that one would otherwise derive from these caves in the limestone.

a visit, however, to the now celebrated cavern known as the grotte de
miremont repaid me for the trouble of reaching it. it lies a few miles to
the north of les eyzies, in the midst of very wild and barren country. from
any one of the heights the landscape on every side is seen to be composed
of hills covered with dark forest and separated by narrow valleys. here and
there the white rock stands out from the enveloping woods of oak, ilex, and
chestnut, or the arid slope shows its waste of stones, whose nakedness the
dry lavender vainly tries to cover with a light mantle of blue-gray tufts.
it is these sterile places which yield the best truffles of perigord.
sometimes trained dogs are used to hunt for the cryptogams, but, as in the
quercy, the pig is much more frequently employed for the purpose. a comical
and ungainly-looking beast this often is: bony and haggard, with a long
limp tail and exaggerated ears. a collar round the neck adds to its
grotesqueness.

one has to climb or descend a steep wooded hill to reach the cavern, for
the entrance is on the side of it. the _metayer_ acts as guide, and his
services are indispensable, for there are few subterranean labyrinths so
extensive and so puzzling as this.

although the principal gallery is barely a mile in length, there are so
many ramifications that one may walk for hours without making a complete
exploration of the daedalian corridors, even with the help of the guide.
with sufficient string to lay down and candles to light him, a stranger
might enter these depths alone and come to no harm; but if he despised the
string and trusted to his memory he would soon have reason to wish that he
had remained on the surface of the earth, where, if he lost himself, there
would be fellow-creatures to help him. now with the sticky and tenacious
clay trying to pull off his boots at every step, now walking like a monkey
on hands and feet to keep his head from contact with the rock, he would
grow weary after an hour or so, and begin to wish to go home, or, at any
rate, to the hotel; but the more his desire to see daylight again took
shape and clearness, the more bewildered he would become, and farther and
farther he would probably wander from the small opening in the side of the
hill. thus he might at length hear the moan of water, and if it did not
scare him, he would see by the glimmer of his solitary candle the gleam
of a stream rushing madly along, then plunging deeper into the earth, to
reappear nobody knows where. this cavern offers little of the beauty of
stalactite and stalagmite; but the roof in many places has a very curious
and fantastic appearance, derived from layers of flints embedded in the
solid limestone, and exposed to view by the disintegration of the rock or
the washing action of water. they can be best likened to the gnarled and
brown roots of old trees, but they take all manner of fanciful forms.

the little house in which i am living stands almost on the spot where some
particularly precious skeletons, attributed to prehistoric men and women,
were dug up about twenty years ago, when the late mr. christy was here
busily disturbing the soil that had been allowed to remain unmoved for
ages. the overleaning rock, which is separated from my temporary home only
by a few yards, probably afforded shelter to generations of those degraded
human beings from whom the anthropologist who puts no bridle on his
hobby-horse is pleased to claim descent. near the base is one of those
symmetrically scooped-out hollows which are such a striking peculiarity
of the formation here, and which suggest to the irreverent that a
cheese-taster of prehistoric dimensions must have been brought to bear
upon the rocks when their consistency was about the same as that of fresh
gruyere. according to one theory, they were washed out by the sea, that
retired from the interior of aquitaine long before the interesting savages
who made arrow-heads and skin-scrapers out of flints, and needles out of
bone, came to this valley and worked for m. lartet and mr. christy. others
say that the sea had nothing to do with the fashioning of these hollows,
but that they were made by the breaking and crumbling away of the more
friable parts of the limestone under the action of air, frost, and water.
while members of learned societies discuss such questions with upturned
noses, a rock above them will sometimes be unable to keep its own
countenance, but, simulating without flattery one of the human visages
below, will wear an expression of humour fiendish enough to startle the
least superstitious of men.

upon the lower part of my rock is hanging the wild rose in flower, and
above it is a patch of grass that is already brown, although we are in the
first week of may; then upon a higher grass-grown steep is a solitary ilex,
looking more worthy of a classic reputation than many others of its race.
its trunk appears to rise above the uppermost ridge of bare rock, and the
outspread branches, with the sombre yet glittering foliage, are marked
against the sky that is blue like the bluebell, as motionless as if they
had been fixed there by heat, like a painted tree on porcelain.

on the other side of the house is a small balcony that looks upon the road,
the peaceful valley, and the darkly-wooded cliffs just beyond the vezere.
during the brief twilight--the twilight of the south, that lays suddenly
and almost without warning a rosy kiss upon the river and the reedy pool--i
sometimes watch from the balcony the barefooted children of the neighbours
playing upon the white road. poor village children! as soon as a wanderer
gets to know them, he leaves them never to see them again. living in
a great city is apt to dull the sensibility, and to close men up in
themselves. in a village you become forcibly interested in surrounding
humanity, and enter into the lives and feelings of others. a young woman
died yesterday in child-birth, and was buried to-day. everybody felt as if
the awful shadow that descended upon the lonely house across the river
had passed close to him and her, and left a chill in the heart. when the
uncovered waggon bearing the deal coffin wrapped in a sheet, and having at
the head an upright cross of flowers and leaves that shook and swayed with
the jolting of this rustic hearse, moved towards the church, nearly the
whole of the population followed. only the day before another woman was
carried along the same white road towards the little cemetery, but the
coffin then was borne upon the shoulders of four persons of her own sex.
now and again fatigue brought the bearers to a standstill; then they would
change shoulders by changing places. and the white coffin, moving up and
down as a waif on the swell of the sea, passed on towards the glowing west,
where presently the purple-tinted wings of evening covered it.

but the peasants are not sentimentalists--far from it. always practical,
they are very quick to perceive the futility of nursing grief, and
especially the unreasonableness of wishing people back in the world who
were no longer able to do their share of its work. a young man came into
the village with a donkey and cart to fetch a coffin for his father who had
just died.

'_ape!_ i dare say he was old,' was the reflection of our servant--a
quercynoise. if it had been the old father who had come to fetch a coffin
for the young man, she would have found something more sympathetic to say
than that.

sometimes at sunset i climb the rugged hill behind the house. then the
stony soil no longer dazzles by its white glitter, but takes a soft tint of
orange, or rose, or lilac, according to the stain of the sky, and there is
no light in the rocky south that so tenderly touches the soul as this. here
the spurge drinks of the wine of heaven with golden lips wide open; but the
hellebore, which has already lost all its vernal greenness, and is parched
by the drought, ripens its drooping seeds sullenly on the shadowy side of
the jutting crag, and seems to hate the sun. higher and yet far below the
plateau is a little field where the lately cut grass has been thrown into
mounds. here the light seems to gain a deeper feeling, and the small
vineyard by the side holds it too. it is one of the very few old vineyards
which, after being stricken nearly unto death by the phylloxera, have
revived, and by some unknown virtue have recovered the sap and spirit of
life. the ancient stocks gnarled and knotted, and as thick as a man's arm,
together with the fresh green leaves and the hanging bunches of buds that
promise wine, wear a colour that cannot be rightly named--a transparent,
subtle, vaporous tint of golden pink or purple, which is the gift of this
warm and wonderful light. a cricket that has climbed up one of the tender
shoots strikes a low note, which is like the drowsy chirrup of a roosting
bird. it is the first touch of a fiddler in the night's orchestra, and
will soon be taken up by thousands of other crickets, bell-tinkling toads,
croaking frogs in the valley, and the solitary owl that hoots from the
hills. below, how the river seems to sleep under the dusky wings of
gathering dreams where the white bridge spans it! beyond, where the
blue-green sky is cut by a broken line of hill and tree, the rocks become
animated in the clear-obscure, and the apparently dead matter, rousing from
its apathy, takes awful forms and expressions of life.

my small boat had been lying on the vezere several days doing nothing, when
i decided upon a little water-faring up the stream. this canoe had been
knocked together with a few deal boards. it had, as a matter of course,
a flat bottom, for a boat with a keel would be quite unsuitable for
travelling long distances on rivers where, if you cannot float in four
inches of water, you must hold yourself in constant readiness to get out
and drag or push your craft over the stones. this exercise is very amusing
at the age of twenty, but the fun grows feeble as time goes on. my boat
was not made to be rowed, but to be paddled, either with the short
single-bladed paddle which is used by the fishermen of the dordogne, and
which they call a 'shovel,' or by the one that is dipped on both sides of
the canoe alternately. there being rapids about every half-mile on the
vezere, and the current in places being very strong, i realized that no
paddler would be able to get up the stream without help, and so i induced
my landlord to accompany me and to bring a pole. he was a good-tempered
man, somewhat adventurous, with plenty of information, and a full-flavoured
local accent which often gave to what he said a point of humour that was
not intended. the voyage, therefore, commenced under circumstances that
promised nothing but pleasantness. it was a perfectly beautiful may
afternoon, with a fresh north breeze blowing that tempered the ardour of
the sun.

the water changed like the moods of a child who has only to choose the form
and manner of his pleasure. now it pictured in its large eye, whose depth
seemed to meet eternity, the lights and forms and colours of the sky, the
rocks, and the trees; now it leapt from the shaded quietude, and, splitting
into two or more currents, separated by willowy islets or banks of pebbles,
rushed with an eager and joyous cry a hundred yards or so; then it stopped
to take breath, and moved dreamily on again. where the water was shallow
was many a broad patch of blooming ranunculus; so that it seemed as if the
fairies had been holding a great battle of white flowers upon the river.
we glided by the side of meadows where all the waving grass was full of
sunshine. on the bank stood purple torches of dame's violet, and the
dog-rose climbing upon the guelder rose was pictured with it in the water.
on the opposite bank stood the great rocks which have caused this part of
the river to be called the gorge of hell. here human beings in perpetual
terror of their own kind cut themselves holes in the face of the precipice,
and lived where now the jackdaw, the hawk, the owl, and the bat are the
only inhabitants. in the middle ages the english companies turned the side
of the rock into a stronghold which was the terror of the surrounding
district.

this fastness was called la roque de tayac, because the village of tayac
faces it on the other side of the river. although only a few fragments of
the masonry that was formerly attached to the rock remain, the chambers cut
in the solid limestone are strange testimony of the habits and contrivances
of england's lawless partisans in these remote valleys. the lower
excavations evidently served for stables, as the mangers roughly cut in
the rock testify. the horses or mules were led up and down a steep narrow
ledge. a perpendicular boring, shaped like a well, connects the lowest
chamber with those above, and there can be no doubt that the nethermost
part served the purpose of a well or cistern. by means of a hanging rope a
man could easily pull himself up to the higher stages and let himself down
in the same manner. in the event of a surprise the rope would, of course,
be pulled up. woe to those who exposed their heads in this cylindrical
passage to the stones which the defenders above had in readiness to hurl
down! but the river flowing deeply at the base of the rock, no part of the
fortress could have been easy of access. such was the stronghold which
obtained so evil a reputation throughout a wide district as an almost
impregnable den of bandits and cut-throats.

we read that the english, who had fortified themselves at the roque de
tayac, having ravaged the country of sarlat in 1408, the men of sarlat laid
an ambush for them, and, taking them by surprise, cut them in pieces. but
the next year, their numbers being again largely increased, they resumed
their forays with the result that the sarladais marched to the valley of
the vezere and regularly besieged the roque de tayac. the struggle was
marked with great ferocity on both sides. the fortress was eventually
captured, but the defenders sold their lives dearly, and many of the
sarladais, instead of returning to their homes, remained under the pavement
of the church across the water.

having passed the first rapids easily, we talked, and the conversation
turned upon--cockchafers! my companion had been much impressed by the
strange doings of a party of gipsy children whom he had lately passed on
the highroad. one of them had climbed up a tree, the foliage of which had
attracted a multitude of cockchafers, and he was shaking down the insects
for the others to collect.

but it was not this that made the teller of the story stop and gaze with
astonishment; it was the use to which the cockchafers were put. as they
were picked up they were crammed into the children's mouths and devoured,
legs, wings, and all. at first he thought the small gipsies were feasting
on cherries. he declared that the sight disgusted him, and spoilt his
appetite for the rest of the day. in this i thought his stomach somewhat
inconsistent, for i knew of a little weakness that he had for raw
snails, which, to my mind, are scarcely less revolting as food than live
cockchafers. he would take advantage of a rainy day or a shower to catch
his favourite prey upon his fruit-trees and cabbages. having relieved them
of their shells, and given them a rinse in some water, he would swallow
them as people eat oysters. he had a firm belief in their invaluable
medicinal action upon the throat and lungs. his brother, he said, would
have died at twenty-three instead of at fifty-three had it not been for
snails. he told me, too, of a man who, from bravado, tried to swallow
in his presence, and at a single gulp, one of the big pale-shelled
snails--known in paris, where they are eaten, after being cooked with
butter and garlic, as _escargots de bourgogne_--but it stuck in his throat,
and a catastrophe would have happened but for the sturdy blow which his
companion gave him on the 'chine.' that a snail-eater should criticise
gipsies for eating cockchafers shows what creatures of prejudice we all
are.

after passing the nine brothers--a name given to nine rocks of rounded
outline standing by the water like towers of a fortress built by
demi-gods--we had our worst fight with the rapids, and were nearly beaten.
it was the last push of the pole from the man behind me, when he had no
more breath in his body, that saved us from being whirled round and carried
back. before one gets used to it, the sensation of struggling up a river
where it descends a rocky channel at a rather steep gradient is a little
bewildering. the flash of the water dazzles, and its rapid movement makes
one giddy. there is no excitement, however, so exhilarating as that which
comes of a hard battle with one of the forces of nature, especially when
nature does not get the best of it. this tug-of-war over, we were going
along smoothly upon rather deep water, when i heard a splash behind me, and
on looking round saw my companion in a position that did not afford him
much opportunity for gesticulation. he was up to his middle in the water,
but hitched on to the side of the boat with his heels and hands. he had
given a vigorous push with his pole upon a stone that rolled, and he rolled
too. now, the boat being very light and narrow, an effort on his part
to return to his former position would have filled it with water; so he
remained still while i, bringing my weight to bear on the other side,
managed to haul him up by the arms. after this experience, he was restless
and apparently uncomfortable, and we had not gone much farther before he
expressed a wish to land on the edge of a field. here he took off the
garments which he now felt were superfluous, vigorously wrung the water out
of them, and spread them in the sun to dry. i left him there fighting with
the flies, whose curiosity and enterprise were naturally excited by such
rare good luck, and went to dream awhile in the shadow of the rock, on the
very edge of which are the ramparts of the ruined castle of la madeleine.
this is the most picturesque bit of the valley of the vezere; but to feel
all the romance of it, and all the poetry of a perfect union of rocks and
ruin, trees and water, one must glide upon the river, that here is deep and
calm, and is full of that mystery of infinitely-intermingled shadow and
reflection which is the hope and the despair of the landscape-painter. now,
in this month of may, the shrubs that clung to the furrowed face of the
white rock were freshly green, and the low plaint of the nightingale, and
the jocund cry of the more distant cuckoo, broke the sameness of the great
chorus of grasshoppers in the sunny meadows.

when i returned to my companion, i found that he was clothed again, but not
in a contented frame of mind. he accompanied me as far as tursac, and then
started off home on foot. he had had enough of the river. there was still
sufficient daylight for me to continue the voyage to le moustier, but,
apart from the fact that i could not get up the rapids alone, i was quite
willing to pass the night at tursac.

having chained the boat to a willow, i walked through the meadows towards a
group of houses, in the midst of which stood a church, easily distinguished
by its walls and tower. when i had arranged matters for the night, i passed
through the doorway of this little church, under whose vault the same
human story that begins with the christening, receives a new impetus from
marriage, and is brought to an end by the funeral, had been repeated by
so many sons after their fathers. the air was heavy with the fragrance
of roses from the lady chapel, where a little lamp gleamed on the ground
beside the altar. as the sun went down, the roses and leaves began to
brighten with the shine of the lamp, like a garden corner in the early
moonlight.

at the inn i met one of those commercial travellers who work about in the
rural districts of france, driving from village to village with their
samples, fiercely competing for the favours of the rustic shopkeeper, doing
their utmost to get before one another, and be the first bee that sucks the
flower, taking advantage of one another's errors and accidents, but always
good friends and excellent table companions when they meet. i learnt that
my new acquaintance was 'in the drapery.' we were comparing notes of our
experience in the rough country of the correze, when he, as he rolled up
another cigarette, said:

'i had learnt to put up with a good deal in the correze, but one day i had
a surprise which was too much for me. i had dined at one of those auberges
that you have been speaking of, and then asked for some coffee. it was an
old man who made it, and he strained it through--guess what he strained it
through!'

i guessed it was something not very appropriate, but was too discreet to
give it a name.

'_eh bien_! it was the heel of an old woollen stocking!'

'and did you drink the coffee?'

'no. i said that i had changed my mind.'

we did not take any coffee that evening. we had something less likely to
set the fancy exploring the secrets of the kitchen, where, through the open
doorway, we could see our old peasant hostess seated on her little bench
in the ingle and nodding her head over the dying embers of her hearth. her
husband was induced by the traveller to bring up from the cherished corner
of his cellar a bottle of the old wine of tursac, made from the patriarchal
vines before the pestilential insect drew the life out of them. the
hillsides above the vezere are growing green again with vineyards, and
again the juice of the grape is beginning to flow abundantly; but years
must pass before it will be worthy of being put into the same cellar with
the few bottles of the old wine which have been treasured up here and there
by the grower, but which he thinks it a sacrilege to drink on occasions
less solemn than marriages or christenings in the family.

'you can often coax the old wine from them,' said my knowing companion, 'if
you go the right way to work.'

'and what is the secret?'

'flattery: there is nothing like it. flatter the peasant and you will be
almost sure to move him. say, 'ah, what a time that was when you had the
old wine in your cellars!' he will say, '_nest-ce pas, monsieur_?' and
brighten up at the thought of it. then you will continue: 'yes, indeed,
that was a wine worth drinking. there was nothing like it to be found
within fifty kilometres. what a bouquet! what a fine _gout du terroir_!'
he will not be able to bear much more of this if he has any of the wine.
unless you are pretty sure that he has some, it is not worth while talking
about it. expect him to disappear, and to come back presently with a
dirty-looking bottle, which he will handle as tenderly as if it were a new
baby.'

those whose travelling in france is carried out according to the
directions given in guide-books--the writers of which nurse the reader's
respectability with the fondest care--will of course conclude that the
best hotels in the wine districts are those in which the best wine of the
country is to be had. this is an error. the wine in the larger hotels is
almost invariably the 'wine of commerce'; that is to say, a mixture of
different sorts more or less 'doctored' with sulphate of lime, to overcome
a natural aversion to travelling. the hotel-keeper, in order to keep on
good terms with the representatives of the wine-merchants--all mixers--who
stop at his house, distributes his custom among them. those who set value
on a pure _vin du pays_ with a specific flavour belonging to the soil,
should look for it in the little out-of-the-way auberge lying amongst the
vineyards. there it is probable that some of the old stock is still left,
and if the vigneron-innkeeper says it is the old wine, the traveller may
confidently believe him. i have never known in such cases any attempt at
deception.

the next morning i reached le moustier. here the valley is broad, but the
rocks, which are like the footstools of the hills, shut in the landscape
all around. these naked perpendicular masses of limestone, yellow like
ochre or as white as chalk, and reflecting the brilliance of the sun, must
have afforded shelter to quite a dense population in the days when man
made his weapons and implements from flints, and is supposed to have lived
contemporaneously with the reindeer. notwithstanding all the digging and
searching that has gone on of late years on this spot, the soil in the
neighbourhood of the once inhabited caverns and shelters is still full of
the traces of prehistoric man.

shortly before my coming, a _savant_--everybody is called a _savant_ here
who goes about with his nose towards the ground--gave a man two francs to
be allowed to dig for a few hours in a corner of his garden. the man was
willing enough to have his ground cleared of stones on these terms. the
_savant_ therefore went to work, and when he left in the evening he took
with him half a sackful of flints and bones.

in a side valley close to le moustier is a line of high vertical or
overleaning rocks. a ledge accessible from the ground runs along the face,
and nearly in the centre, and at the back of it, are numerous hollows in
the calcareous stone, some natural, others partly scooped out with the aid
of metal implements, whose marks can still be seen. each of these shelters
was inhabited. holes and recesses have been cut in the walls to serve for
various domestic purposes, and on the ground are traces of fireplaces,
reservoirs for water, etc. the original inhabitants of these hollows may
have been savages no more advanced in the arts than those who worked
flints, but it is certain that the latest occupiers were much more
civilized. rows of holes roughly cut in the limestone show where the ends
of beams once rested, and the use of these timbers was evidently to support
a roof that covered much of the ledge. it is quite certain that people
lived here in the middle ages, and they might do so now but for the
difficulty of bringing up water. the security which the position afforded
could hardly have been lost sight of in the days when the inhabitants of
guyenne were in constant dread of being attacked. one must therefore be
guarded against wild talk about prehistoric man in connection with these
rock dwellings, which in many cases were used as fortresses during the
three hundred years' struggle between the english and french in aquitaine.

my waterfaring back to les eyzies was far easier than the voyage up-stream.
nevertheless, there was some excitement in it, for when the rapids were
reached, the current snatched the boat, as it were, from me, but carried me
with it, by little reefs each marked out as an islet as white as snow, by
the floating flowers of the water ranunculus; but when its strength failed,
it left me to drift where, in the dark shadow of rock and tree, the water
rested from its race. presently the rapids were seen again dancing in the
sun, and the boat, gliding on to just where the smooth surface curved and
the current took its leap without a ripple, darted forward like a startled
water-bird. once a back current whirled my fragile boat completely round.
then i remembered the good advice of the friendly otter at beynac with
reference to going down these streams, where the water has to be watched
with some attention if one does not wish to get capsized: '_tenez-vous
toujours dans le plus fort du courant_.'

again in calm water, i recognised, beyond the still grass and the scattered
flame of the poppies, the high walls of the fortress-like church of tayac,
with the light of the sinking sun upon them. then a little lower down at
the ford, which was my stopping-place, a pair of bullocks were crossing the
river with a waggon-load of hay; so that the picturesque, the idyllic, and
the sentiment of peace were all blended so perfectly as to make me feel
that the pen was powerless, and that the painter's brush alone could save
the scene from passing away for ever.

tayac and les eyzies form one very straggling commune, and the church where
the slain men of sarlat lie serves for the entire population. this edifice
of the eleventh and twelfth centuries deserves a brief description. there
is much grandeur in its vast, deeply-recessed romanesque portal, with
marble columns in the jambs and numerous archivolts. then its high, narrow
windows, and the low, square towers, pierced with loopholes, give to it
that air of the fortress which immediately impresses the beholder. without
doubt it was built like so many other churches of the same stormy and
uncertain period, to be used as a place of refuge in case of danger. the
entrance to the principal tower is artfully concealed at the back of a
chapel at the east end, and can only be reached with a ladder. the very
narrow passage makes two or more right angles before it leads to the foot
of the spiral staircase--a disposition of great value in defence.

having heard of a cavern in the garden of the presbytery which, in the
memory of living people, was the refuge of a murderer whom the gendarmes
were afraid to follow underground, because it was believed that he would
knock them on the head one after the other while they were wriggling
through the passage, and then quietly walk out by a back way unknown to
anyone but himself, i felt a strong desire to explore this cave of evil
repute. the idea was all the more enticing because i was assured that
nobody had entered it but the murderer. i called upon the cure, and asked
him how he felt at the prospect of a little trip underground in his own
garden. he did not seem to feel very eager for the adventure; but when i
proposed to go alone, he was too polite to let me depart with his best
wishes. he decided to accompany me. when he had put on his oldest
_soutane_, we started with a packet of candles and a ball of string.

priests' gardens are often very interesting, and the one through which
we now passed pleased me greatly. it was a long strip, in two or three
terraces, upon the rocky hillside. many fruit-trees, but chiefly almond,
cherry, and peach, were scattered over it. there was also a straggling
vine-trellis, from which there now spread in the june air that sweet
fragrance of the freshly-opened flower-buds of which the poet-king solomon
sung. in the highest part was the cavern. we had to crawl in upon our hands
and knees, and in some places to lie out almost flat. as my friend the cure
insisted upon going first, i could not help thinking that the back view
of him, as he wormed his way along the low gallery, was not exactly
sacerdotal. sometimes we passed over smooth sand--evidently left by a
stream that once issued here; at other times over small stones, which were
bad for the knees. we kept a keen look-out for the remains of prehistoric
men and beasts, but only found the shells of eggs which a fox had probably
stolen from the cure's fowl-house. there were also rabbits' bones, whose
presence there was to be explained in the same way. my companion, however,
having once entered his cave, was resolved upon returning another day and
digging conscientiously in the sand, which appeared to be very deep in
places. he may since have unearthed some pre-historic treasures there. the
cavern was interesting as showing the honeycombing effects of water on
limestone rock, but it did not lead very far into the hill. the belief that
the murderer escaped by another opening than the one by which he entered
was founded on fiction.

after the cave exploration, the cure was so good as to accompany me to a
mysterious ruin in the neighbourhood, which he believed to be of english
origin, because it was always spoken of by the people of the locality as
william's chapel. the english pronunciation of the name william had been
preserved in the patois. after this, i did not doubt that his supposition
was correct. some englishman was connected with the history of the
building; but was it really a chapel? the hill that we had to climb to it
was very high, and, although covered with herbage, almost precipitous. the
building was not on the summit, but on a ledge of rock some distance down
the cliff. the ruin consisted of only a few fragments of wall, built very
strongly of well-shaped stones laid together without mortar. holes cut in
the rock showed where the ends of beams had rested. the position was
rather one for a fortress than for a chapel; but no doubt englishmen of
an eccentrically religious turn appeared as early as the thirteenth or
fourteenth century, if not earlier. if the people of the valley climbed up
to william's chapel to say their prayers, they must have been very pious
indeed.

the strength of the current in the vezere had turned me from my first plan,
which was to ascend the river as far as montignac, and take the road thence
to hautefort, the birthplace of bertrand de born, who was put into hell by
dante for having encouraged henry plantagenet's sons to rebel against their
father. the sombre florentine treated the troubadour baron with excessive
harshness, for it is recorded of bertrand that his repentance for the sins
of his restless and agitated life was so sincere that he ended his days as
a monk in the monastery of citeaux. [footnote: 'mobile, agite, comme son
aventureuse existence qui commenca au donjon d'hautefort et s'eteint
dans le silence du cloitre de citeaux.--'_discours sur les celebrites du
perigord_,' par l. sauveroche.]

bertrand de born was an evil counsellor to henry court-mantel, but a
singularly attractive figure of the twelfth century was this troubadour
noble, whose life in the world was divided between the soothing charm of
the '_gai scavoir_' and the excitement of war, and who was equally at his
ease whether he was holding the lance or the pen. he had the tenderest
friendship for the young prince, and mourned his death in the best elegy
that appeared at the dawn of modern literature.

[illustration: chateau de hautefort.]

of the ancient fortress of bertrand de born, viscount of hautefort, a few
vestiges are left, which may be easily distinguished from the later masonry
of the castle with which they are combined.

[illustration: a house at perigueux.]




in the valley of the isle.


it was in the full flame of noon on a hot june day that we arrived at the
headquarters which i had chosen for my second summer in perigord. it was
a little chateau, of which i was to occupy a small wing, and also a low
building that was quite detached--all very plain and rustic, as, indeed,
most of the really old chateaux that are still inhabited are. at this
burning hour the place seemed as quiet as the ideal retreat of a literary
hermit could be. in the large old-fashioned garden, where magnolias and
firs mingled with all kinds of fruit-trees, and lettuce-beds were fringed
with balsams, golden apricots hung upon the branches that were breaking
with their weight, and seemed to say: 'there is nobody here to eat us. we
are quite tired of waiting to be gathered.'

suddenly there was a great noise of barking, and three or four dogs that
had smelt or heard strangers rushed through the archway that led to the
court, which was so much like a farm-yard that no one would know the
difference from the description.

'mees! mees! black! black!' cried a voice from within.

there was nothing in the sound of these words to cause astonishment, for
most french dogs that move in good society have english names. if you were
to call out at any respectable gathering of these animals, whether in the
north or the south, 'fox,' 'stop,' 'black,' 'mees' (not miss), the chances
are that they would all try to reply at once.

after the dogs came bare-footed domestics of both sexes, who stared at us
wonderingly, while saluting politely, and evidently not wishing to show
their curiosity. then, when we entered the court, we were met by a great
many fowls, ducks, and turkeys of various ages. not a few had apparently
just jumped out of their shells. lastly came the master and mistress of
the house, advancing in the slow and stately style of the times when the
drawbridge would have had to be lowered, but moving in the midst of the
poultry. they were gracious and hospitable, and very soon we settled down,
altogether well pleased with our new quarters.

here we were surrounded by trees just as robinson crusoe was by his grove
when it had grown tall and thick. now, the traveller in southern france who
lingers as i am wont to linger in my wanderings, will probably have cause
to pine, as i have pined, for trees about his house to shelter him from the
fury of the summer sun. there are few houses that are not hovels or ruins
to be found, except where the land is fertile, and wherever it repays
labour the owner loathes a tree that produces nothing but its wood. thus
we get those wide, burning plains, where so few trees are to be seen save
poplars along the watercourses and walnuts bordering the roads. even these
become rare, as in journeying farther south the last low buttresses of the
rocky highlands are left behind.

here, close to this retreat that i had chosen on the banks of the isle,
some twenty miles below perigueux, rose, on the opposite side of the river,
high cliffs of white limestone with wooded brows. the chateau was on a
small island formed by a curve of the river under the cliffs, and a short
canal drawn across the loop to facilitate the navigation of the isle.

a very lazy kind of navigation it was. two or three barges would pass in a
day on their way to perigueux or bordeaux. they were of considerable size,
and were capable of some sea-faring, but their masts were now laid flat,
and they were towed along at the rate of two or three yards a minute by
a lean and melancholy horse that had ceased to care for cursing, and was
almost indifferent to beating. as the navigation had been nearly killed by
the railway, the canal was allowed to fill itself with water-plants, which
were interesting to me, but exceedingly hurtful to the temper of the
bargees. they vented their fury upon the engineer, who was absent, and the
horse that was present--unfortunately for the poor brute, for somehow he
seemed to be looked upon as a representative of the negligent functionary.

'you appear to be having a bad time,' said i one day to a great dark bargee
who was streaming from every pore, as much from bad temper as from the
exertion of cracking his whip, and whose haggard horse looked as if he
would soon break off in the middle from the strain of trying to move the
barge, which was stuck in the weeds.

'a bad time of it! i believe you. _sacr-r-r-re!_ if i could only send that
pig of an engineer to noumea i should be a happy man!'

if wishes could have wafted him, he would have gone farther than new
caledonia long before.

one day, far on in the summer, this engineer actually appeared upon the
canal in his steam yacht, and there was great excitement in the country.
the peasants left their work in the fields and ran to the banks to gaze at
him. he did not go very far before he got stuck in the weeds himself. then
he reversed his engine, made back as fast as he could, and was seen no
more.

but i am going on too fast. i have not yet described the chateau. the
picture of it is clearly engraved upon the memory, and a very pretty
picture i still think it; more so now, perhaps, than when the reality was
before me, for such is the way of the mind. i can see the extinguisher
roofs of the small towers through openings in the foliage rising from a
sunny space enclosed by trees. i can see the garden, with its old dove-cot
like a low round tower, its scattered aviaries, its rambling vines that
climb the laden fruit-trees, its firs, magnolias, great laurels, its
glowing tomatoes and melons, its lettuces and capsicums and scattered
flowers, all mingled with that carelessness which is art unconscious of
its own grace; its daedalian paths, its statues so quaintly placed in
unsuspected corners, its--well, the picture is finished, for now begins the
effort to recall its details. the eye's memory is a judicious painter that
never overcrowds the canvas. i can see on that side of the building, which
looks upon a much wilder garden, where peach and plum trees stride over
grassy ground adjoining the filbert-grove that dwindles away into the
wooded warren, a broad line of tall nettles in the shade against the wall.
hard by, on the line--so it was said--of the filled-up moat, is a row of
ancient quinces, with long crooked arms, green, gray, or black with moss
and lichen, stretching down to the tall grass, where in the dewy hours of
early darkness the glow-worms gleam.

this little chateau was never a stronghold to inspire an enemy with much
respect; it was rather a castellated manor-house, dating from the times
when even the residences of the small nobility were fortified. marred as it
had been by alterations made in the present century without any respect for
the past, it was still very interesting. in one of the towers, said to be
of the fourteenth, and certainly not later than the fifteenth, century, was
a chapel on the ground-floor with gothic vaulting, and which still served
its original purpose. a contemporaneous tower flanking the entrance
contained the old spiral staircase leading to the upper rooms. i often
lingered upon it in astonishment at the mathematical science shown in its
design, and the mechanical perfection of its workmanship. what seemed to be
a slender column round which the spiral vaulting turned was not really
one, for each of the stone steps was so cut as to include a section of the
column as a part of its own block. the contrivances by which this staircase
_en colimacon_ was made to hold together, and to hold so well as to have
lasted several hundred years, with a promise to continue in the same way
another century or two, were deftly hidden from the eye of those unversed
in such technicalities. in the hollow at the foot of the stairs was what
i took to be a very old and rough christening font, such as i had seen in
village churches. but it was not that; it was called a _pierre a l'huile_.
its purpose a long time ago was to receive the oil taken from the first
pressing of walnuts after the annual gathering. then the priests came and
fetched what they wanted of it to serve for the rites of the church during
the year.

all this summer we lived out of doors, except at night. even rosalie, our
servant, did most of her cooking in the open air with the aid of a portable
charcoal stove, which she placed in the shade of some noble plane-trees
that were planted by accident on the day of prince louis napoleon's _coup
d'etat_. they were already tall and strong when his will-o'-the-wisp, which
he had mistaken for a star, sank in the bloody swamp of sedan. when the
rising wind announced a storm, the swaying branches shed their dry bark,
which was piled upon the hearth indoors, where a cheerful blaze shot up if
by chance the rain fell and the air grew chilly. but very seldom did even a
shower come to moisten the parched land and cool the heated air. thus the
plane-trees came to look upon the stove beneath them as a fixture.

these open-air kitchens are by no means uncommon in southern france during
the hot months. i have a pleasant recollection of dining one scented
evening in may with my friend the otter at beynac in his garden
terraced upon rocks above the dordogne. the table was under a spreading
chestnut-tree in full bloom. not many yards away the swarthy clodine had
her kitchen beneath an acacia. strange as it may seem, the hissing of
her frying-pan as she dropped into it the shining fish did not mingle
unpoetically with the murmur of lagging bees overhead and the soothing
plaint of the river running over its shallows below. nor, when the purple
flush faded on the water's face, and little points of fire began to show
between branches laden with the snow of flowers, did the fragrant steam
that arose from clodine's coffee-pot make a bad marriage with the amorous
breath of all the seen and unseen blossoms. what is there better in life
than hours such as those?

but now i am by the isle. the plane-trees are on the edge of a little dell,
in the centre of which is a smooth space encircled by many trees, forming a
dense grove. a rough table has been set up here with the aid of planks and
tressels. it is our dining-table, and the centre of the grove is our
_salle a manger._ wrens and blackcaps hop about the branches of the
filbert-bushes, and when the _metayer's_ lean cat comes sneaking along,
followed by a hungry kitten that is only too willing to take lessons in
craft and slaughter, the little birds follow them about from branch to
branch, scolding the marauders at a safe distance, and giving the alarm to
all the other feathered people in the grove. here the nightingales warble
day and night until they get their young, when, finding that hunting for
worms and grubs to put into other beaks than their own is very prosaic
business, they only sing when they have time to fly to some topmost twig
and forget that they are married.

when the sun is near setting, a sound very different from the warble of a
bird is heard close by. it is some leader of a frog orchestra in the sedges
of the canal giving the first note. it is like a quirk of gluttony just
rousing from the torpor of satisfaction. the note is almost immediately
taken up by other frogs, and the croaking travels along the canal-banks as
fire would if there were a gale to help it. but the music only lasts a few
minutes, for the hour is yet too early for the great performance. the frogs
are only beginning to feel a little lively. it is when the sun has gone
quite down, and the stars begin to twinkle upon the water, that the ball
really opens. then the gay tumult seems to extinguish every other sound,
and to fill the firmament. oh! they must have a high time of it, these
little green-backed frogs that make so much noise throughout the warm
nights of june. sometimes i creep into my canoe and paddle by the light of
moon or stars as noiselessly as i can along the fringe of sedges and flags
and bullrushes, hoping to watch them at their gambols. but the frog is a
very sly reptile, and you must stay up very late indeed in order to be a
match for him in craft, unless you dazzle his eyes with the light of a
torch or lantern. then he is a fool in the presence of that which is out of
the order of his surroundings, and his amazement or curiosity paralyzes his
muscles. it is in this way that those who want the jolly frog just to eat
his hind-legs _a la poulette_ or otherwise catch him with the hand, unless
they have the patience and the cruelty to fish for him with a hook baited
with a bit of red flannel.

now i will speak of my own hermitage, my ideal nook for writing, reading,
and doing nothing, which, after much wandering and vain searching, i found
at length here. yes, i found it at last; and i much fear that i shall never
find another like it. it lay at the back of the chateau, beyond the shaded
nettles and the ancient quinces. my ordinary way to it was through a piece
of waste, which, with unintentional sarcasm, was called the 'little park.'
it was overgrown by burdocks, to which it had been abandoned for years--who
could tell how many?--and was rambled over by turkeys, guinea-hens, and
other poultry. then i passed through a little gate, crossed another bit of
waste that was neither lawn nor field, skirted a patch of buckwheat, and
entered a small wood or shrubbery, where plum and filbert trees grew with
oaks and beeches, until i came to water. this was the _vivier_ of the
chateau--fishpond, long drawn out like a canal, and fed by a spring, but
which had been left to itself until it was nearly shaded over by alders
and other trees. at the end farthest from all habitations was a little
structure built of stones, open on one side, and with small orifices in
the three remaining walls. these could be closed, and yet they were not
windows. their purpose was much more like that of loopholes in a mediaeval
barbican. they were to enable the man inside to watch the movements
of migratory birds, and to send his shot into the thick of them when,
unsuspecting danger, they chanced to come within range. the little building
was an _affut_. near to it was a sort of fixed cage, intended for decoy
birds, but it had long been without tenants when i took possession of this
refuge from all the human noises of the world. the other sounds did not
worry me, although they often drew me from my work. the splash of a fish
would take me to the water's edge, where i would watch the small pikes
lying like straight roots that jut from the banks under water. the cooing
of the little brown turtles in the trees overhead, the movements of a pair
of kingfishers that would often settle close by upon an old stump, the
magpies and jays, and especially the oriels, would make my thoughts
wander amongst the leaves while the ink was drying in the pen. the oriels
tantalized me, because i could always hear them in the crests of the trees,
until, about the middle of august, they went away on their long journey
to the south, but could very rarely catch sight of their gold and black
plumage. although they will draw near to gardens to steal fruit when they
have eaten the wild cherries, they are among the most suspicious and wary
of birds.

the oriel is a strange singer. it generally begins by screeching harshly;
then follow three or four flute-like notes, which seem to indicate that the
bird could be a musician if it would only persevere. but it will not take
the trouble. it goes on repeating its 'lor-e-oh!' just as its tree-top
companions, the cicadas, keep up their monotonous creaking.

from my cabin i could see all the lights, colours, and shadows of the day
change and pass, but the sweetest music of the summer hours was heard when
the soft sunshine of evening fell in patches on the darkening water, and
on the green grass on each side of the brown path strewn with last year's
trodden leaves.

sometimes a hedgehog would creep across the narrow path, shaded with
nut-bushes, oaks, and alders towards the water, and at night--i was often
there at night--the glow-worms gleamed all about upon the ground, and there
were mysterious whisperings whose cause i could not trace. yes, it was an
ideal literary hermitage, but as perfection is not to be found anywhere
on land or water, even this spot had its drawback. there were too many
mosquitoes. my friend the owner of the chateau often said to me, '_la
moustigue de l'isle n'est pas mechante;_' but on this point i could not
agree with him. i bore upon me visible signs of its wickedness; but in
course of time i and the '_mostique de i'isle_' lived quite harmoniously
together in the little shanty under the trees.

where the weedy and shady avenue leading to the chateau made an angle with
the highroad, there was often a caravan or tilt-cart stationed for days
together. sometimes it was the travelling house of a tinker and his family;
in which case the man was generally to be seen working outside upon his
pots and pans in the shade of a tree. sometimes it belonged to a party of
basket and rustic-chair makers, who gathered the reeds and hazel-sticks
that they needed as they passed through the country. some were gipsies, and
some were not; but all were baked by the sun almost to the colour of moors.
having a taste for nomadic life myself, i used to stay and talk to these
people from time to time; but none of them interested me so much as the
wandering cobbler and his dog, whose acquaintance i had made higher up the
country amongst the rocks.

i can still see them both in the shade of the old gateway; the man seated
in the entrance of the little tower, where, at the top of the spiral
staircase, is the village prison; the dog lying with his nose upon his paws
just within the line drawn by the gateway's shadow across the dazzling
road. they both came one evening and took up their position here with as
much assurance as if it had been theirs by right of inheritance. they soon
set to work, the man mending boots and shoes, and the dog making himself
disagreeable to all the male members of the canine population for a
couple of miles or so around. until the cobbler's companion settled down
comfortably, he had several exhilarating fights with local dogs that looked
upon him as an intruder and an impostor. he really was both. he had no
great courage, but he had grown impudent and daring from the day that he
had first worn a collar armed with spikes. when his enemies had taken a few
bites at this, they came to the conclusion that there was something very
wrong in his anatomy. after the first encounter they were not only willing
to leave him alone, but were exceedingly anxious to 'cut' him when they met
him unexpectedly. they approached the gateway as little as possible; but
when they were obliged to pass it, they drew their tails under them, showed
the whites of their eyes, and having crept very stealthily to within ten
yards or so of the archway where the interloper appeared to be dozing, they
made a valiant rush towards the opening. notwithstanding these precautions,
the cobbler's dog, which had been watching them all the while out of the
corner of one eye, was often too quick for them.

man and dog were ludicrously alike both in appearance and character. the
beast was one of the ugliest of mongrels, and the man might well have been
the final expression of the admixture of all races, whose types had been
taken by destiny from the lowest grades of society. they were both grizzly,
thick-set, and surly. they both seemed to have reached the decline of
life with the same unconquerable loathing of water, except as a means of
quenching thirst. the dog, although some remote bull-dog ancestor had
bequeathed him short hair, had bristles all over his face just like his
master. they were a couple of cynics, but they believed in one another, and
loved one another with an affection that was quite edifying. the dog wished
for nothing better than to lie hour after hour near his master, hoping
always, however, for an occasional fight to keep him in health and spirits.
the cobbler did nothing to make himself liked by the inhabitants, but he
could afford to work more cheaply than others who were 'established,' and
who had a wife and children to keep; consequently the pile of old boots and
shoes that looked quite unmendable rose in front of him, and for three or
four weeks he remained in the same place stitching and tapping. having
locked up his things at night in the tower--he had obtained permission to
make this use of it--he disappeared with his dog, and what became of them
until next day was a mystery.

i admired the blunt independence and practical philosophy of this homeless
man. although he was disagreeable to others, he was on good terms with
himself, and seemed quite satisfied with his lot. if, when he had named his
price for mending a pair of shoes, anybody tried to beat him down, he would
say, 'take them and mend them yourself!' his incivility obtained for him a
reputation for honesty, and his prices were soon accepted without a murmur.
he talked to nobody unless he was obliged to do so, and by his moroseness
he came to be respected. i managed to draw him into conversation once by
feigning to be much impressed by the comeliness and amiable nature of his
dog, and he then told me that he had been wandering ever since he was a boy
in languedoc and guyenne, stopping in a village as long as there was
work to do and then moving on to another. wherever people wore boots or
shoes--if it were only on sundays--there was always something to be done by
working cheaply.

the silent cobbler might have kept his open-air shop longer than he did in
the shadow of the mediaeval gateway, if his dog had not quarrelled with the
sole representative of police authority for having put on his gala uniform,
which included a cocked-hat and a sword. for this want of respect the
animal was imprisoned in the room of the tower, to the great joy of all the
other dogs, but to the intense grief of his master, who found it impossible
to turn a deaf ear to the plaintive moans that reached him from above. and
thus it came to pass that they went away together rather suddenly in search
of a gateway somewhere else, the dog earnestly praying, after his fashion,
that it might not be one with a tower.

one june morning, soon after sunrise, twenty-seven mowers came to the
chateau to cut the grass in the great meadow lying between the river under
the cliffs and my moat--i called it mine because it was almost made over to
me for the time being, together with the bit of wood and the cabin. each
mower brought with him his scythe, an implement of husbandry which in
france is in no danger of being classed with agricultural curiosities of
the past. here the reaping and the mowing machine make very little progress
in the competition between manual and mechanical labour. in the southern
provinces, few owners of the soil have ever seen such contrivances. people
who cling to the poetic associations of the scythe and the sickle--and who
does not that has been awakened by their music in his childhood?--must not
cry out against the laws which have caused the land of france to be divided
up into such a multitude of small properties, for it is just this that
preserves the old simplicity of agriculture as effectually as if some
idyllic poet with a fierce hatred of all machines were the autocratic ruler
of the country. whether the nation gains or loses by such a state of things
is a question for political economists to wrangle over; but that the
artist, the seeker of the picturesque, the romantic roamer, and the
sentimental lover of old custom gain by it can hardly be denied.

some of the mowers were men of sixty, others were youths of seventeen or
eighteen: all were contented at the prospect of earning nothing, but of
being treated with high good cheer. now, victuals and drink are a great
deal in this life, but not everything, and these men would not have come
on such terms had they not been moved by a neighbourly spirit. they were
themselves all landowners, or sons of landowners. had wages been given, two
francs for the day would have been considered high pay, and the food would
have been very rough. no turkeys would have had their throats cut; no
coffee and rum would have been served round. in short, this haymaking day
was treated as an annual festival.

a goodly sight was the long line of mowers as their scythes swept round and
the flowery swathes fell on the broad mead in the tender sunshine, while
the edges of the belt of trees were still softened by the morning mist.
after the mowers, all the workers employed on the home-farm, men, women,
and boys, entered the field to turn the swathes, which in a few hours were
dried by the burning sun. on the morrow a couple of oxen drew a creaking
waggon into the field, and when the angelus sounded from the church-tower
in the evening the haymaking was over. but i have not yet described the
mowers' feast.

at about ten o'clock the big bell that hangs outside the chateau is rung,
and the mowers, dropping their scythes, leave the field and troop into the
great kitchen, which has changed so little for centuries. the pots and pans
hanging against the walls, and the pieces of bacon from the beams, have
been renewed, but not much else. there is the same floor paved with stones,
now much cracked and worn into hollows, the same hearth and broad chimney
with hanging chain; and the long table and benches stretching from end to
end, although their age is uncertain, were certainly fashioned upon the
exact model of others that preceded them. richard coeur-de-lion, when
campaigning in guyenne, may have sat down many a time to such a table as
this, and to just such a meal as the one that is about to be served to the
mowers, with the exception of the coffee and rum.

let us take a look into the great caldrons, which appear to have come out
of gargantua's kitchen. one contains two full-sized turkeys and several
fowls, another a leg of pork, and a third a considerable portion of a calf.
then there is a caldron of soup, made very 'thick and slab.' home-baked
loaves, round like trenchers, and weighing 10lb. each, are on the side
table, together with an immense bowl of salad and a regiment of bottles
filled with wine newly drawn from the cask.

in the evening, when all the grass has been cut, there is another and a
greater feast. the work being done, the men linger long at the table.
then all the household is assembled in the great kitchen, including the
_chatelain_ and _chatelaine_, and the young men who are known to have
voices are called upon to sing. they do not need much pressing, for what
with the heat of the sun during the day, then the wine, the coffee and rum,
their blood is rushing rather hotly through the veins. one after another
they stand up on the benches and give out their voices from their sturdy
chests, which are burnt to the colour of terra-cotta. they make so much
noise that the old warming-pan trembles against the wall. although they
all speak patois among themselves, they are reluctant to sing the songs of
perigord in the presence of strangers. the young men are proud of their
french, bad as it is, and a song in the cafe-concert style of music and
poetry fires their ambition to excel on a festive occasion like this,
whilst their patois ditties seem then only fit to be sung at home or in the
fields. at length, however, they allow themselves to be persuaded, and
they sing in chorus a 'reapers' song,' composed long ago by some unknown
perigourdin poet, who was perhaps a jongleur or a troubadour. the notes are
so arranged as to imitate the rhythmic movements of the reaper: first the
drawing back of the right arm, then the stroke of the sickle, and lastly,
the laying down of the cut corn. there is something of sadness as well as
of joy in the repeated cadences of the simple song, and it moves the heart,
for now the old men join in, and the sound gathers such strength that the
little martins under the eaves must be pressing troubled breasts against
their young.

this chateau had remained in the same family for centuries, and the actual
owner, although by no means indifferent to the noble exploits of his
ancestors, had long ago settled down to the life of an agricultural
gentleman, and devoted what energy may have come down to him from the
crusaders to the cultivation of tobacco, the improvement of stock, the
rearing of pigeons and poultry, the planting of trees, and a great deal
more belonging to the same order of interest. he was a strongly marked type
of the _gentilhomme campagnard_, in whom blue blood combines perfectly with
rustic tastes and simplicity of manners. like most men who live greatly to
themselves, he had his hobbies, and they were all of a very respectable
kind. one was to surround himself with trees; another was to have all kinds
of captive birds about him. i was never able to know exactly how many
aviaries he possessed, for i was always finding a fresh one curiously
hidden in some neglected corner. he liked to mix up all sorts of birds
together, such as pigeons, doves--tame and wild--blackbirds, linnets,
canaries, chaffinches, sparrows, tomtits--no, the tomtits had been turned
out. i asked why.

'because,' said m. de v., 'there is no bird so wicked for its size as the
titmouse. it pecks other birds with which it is shut up so often in the
same part of the head that at length it makes a hole and picks out the
brains.'

he used to catch his birds by means of a long net, and his favourite place
for spreading it was along the side of the patch of buckwheat which was
sown to feed the captives. he was a true lover of birds, and by observing
them had stored up in his mind a fund of curious knowledge respecting their
characters and habits. he only worked a portion of his land with the aid
of the servants of the chateau; the rest was farmed on the system of
_metayage_, for which he had a very strong liking. he said it was far
preferable from the landlord's point of view to leasing, because the owner
of the soil remained absolute master of his property. he could take care
that nothing was done which did not please him, for the _metayer_ or
_colon_ was on no firmer footing than that of an upper servant. if the
landlord was not satisfied with the manner in which his land was treated,
or if he suspected his _metayer_ of trying to take an unfair advantage of
him in the division of proceeds, all he had to do was to change him for
another. but it was the interest of both to work well together, and it
was the duty of the landlord to assist the _metayer_ as much as possible,
especially when times were hard.

on this estate the _colons_ were housed free, but they paid one-third of
the taxes. at the time of sowing, the seed was found by the landlord, but
the colon returned half of the amount when the crop was gathered.

_metayage_, or the system of sharing results between the landowner and the
labouring peasant, still flourishes in france, notwithstanding the severe
denunciations passed upon it by various writers. if it were a very bad
system, it would have fallen into disuse long before now, for although the
french have a tendency to keep their wheels in old ruts, they are as keen
as any other people in protecting their own interests. it is a system that
would soon become impossible without trustfulness and honesty. on both
sides there must be fair dealing. the _colon_ must feel that the landlord
will help him in time of trial and need, and the landlord must feel that
the _colon_ is not trying to cheat him. in the great majority of cases, the
man who does the ploughing, the sowing and the harvesting quite realizes
that honesty with him is the best policy, and the owner of the soil knows
that it is to his interest to support his _metayer_, and encourage him with
judicious aid when the times are bad. the _metayer_, who has hope of making
a little money over and above what is barely sufficient to support himself
and his family, and knows that results will depend largely upon his
own sagacity and industry, works with a steady zeal that it would be
unreasonable to expect of the hired labourer, who, having his measured
wage always in his mind's eye, has no incentive to do more than what is
rigorously expected of him.

it may happen that the _metayer_, with all his labour--carried sometimes
to an extreme that degrades the man physically and mentally--and all
his frugality, which so often entails constitutional enfeeblement and
degeneration, because the nutrition is not sufficient to correct the
exhaustion of toil, obtains really less value for his work than an english
farm labourer, and is not so well housed; but, on the other hand, he enjoys
a large amount of liberty and independence, and has the hope, if he is
young, of being able to save money, buy some land, and become his own
master. a _metairie_ is seldom so large as to be beyond the working
capabilities of a man and his family. in guyenne an estate of a few
hundred acres, if the land is productive, is often divided up into several
_metairies_.

farm labourers are not an overfed or overpaid class in perigord. food that
is almost bread and vegetables, and a wage of one franc a day, are the
ordinary conditions on which men work from sunrise to darkness. lodging is
not always included. i have known men in the full vigour of life earning
only the equivalent of ninepence halfpenny a day, paying rent out of it,
and presumably supporting a wife and children.

the daily life at the chateau was quite old fashioned in its simplicity.
everybody rose with the sun, or very soon afterwards. at nine o'clock the
bell in the court rang for the principal meal, which was called dinner.
kings dined at about the same hour in the times of the crusaders. early in
the afternoon the bell rang again. this was for _collation_, a very light
repast, which was often nothing more than salad or fruit and a _frotte_--a
piece of crusty bread rubbed with garlic. at about seven o'clock the bell
rang for supper.

the small chateaux with which the whole country hereabouts is strewn,
notwithstanding that most of them have been partially rebuilt or grossly
and wantonly mangled without a purpose such as the rational desire of
increasing homely comfort may excuse, even when combined with no respect
for the past, nevertheless contain numerous details that call up in the
mind pictures of the life of old france. in the rat-haunted lofts and
lumber-rooms may still be seen, worm-eaten and covered with dust, the
_cacolet_--a wooden structure shaped like the gable roof of a house, and
which, when set upon a horse's back, afforded sitting accommodation for two
or three persons on each side. there are people who can still remember, on
the roads of perigord, the _cacolets_ carrying merry parties to marriage
feasts and other gatherings. in a few of the great dining-rooms the visitor
will still notice the _alcove volante_--a bedstead, that is a little house
in itself, put into a cosy quiet nook where a person can get into bed
without being observed by others in the room. a pretty sentiment caused it
to be especially reserved for the grandmothers, who, stretched upon the
warm feathers on the winter evenings, could rest their weary limbs while
listening to the talk of their descendants and friends, until drowsiness
began to make confusion of the present and the past, and then they would
pull the cords which closed the curtains and go to sleep. poor old ladies,
now in their graves under the paving-stones of little churches or beneath
the grass of rural cemeteries, how happy for them that they did not dream
of the future in their snug alcoves near the fire--of a revolution that
would kill or scatter their descendants, and of the strangers to their
blood who would lie in their beds!

the detached dovecot is seen in almost every old manorial garden. although
pigeons are seldom kept in it, the structure has been preserved because of
its usefulness for various purposes and the solidity of its masonry. in
some of them is to be seen the old spiral ladder or staircase winding like
a serpent round the interior wall from the ground to the domed or pointed
roof. by means of this ladder the pigeons could be easily taken from their
nests as they were wanted. these great dovecots are an interesting remnant
of feudalism. down to the revolution the right of keeping pigeons was still
a _droit seigneurial_. to those who enjoyed the privilege, the business was
therefore a profitable one, for the birds fed largely at other people's
expense.

it is rare to find the ancient walls and towers which stud the hills that
rise above these valleys in the hands of families who owned them even in
the last century. terror of the revolutionists caused most of the small
nobility of the country to forsake their homes and lands, which were
consequently sold by the state _revolutionnairement_, and they who acquired
them were thrifty, sagacious people of the agricultural, mercantile, or
official class, whose political principles bent easily before the wind that
was blowing, and whose savings enabled them to profit by the misfortunes of
those who had so long enjoyed the advantages of a privileged position. the
descendants of the men who seized their opportunity, and who purchased the
estates of the refugees--often at the price 'of an old song'--generally
cultivate anti-republican politics, for they have the best of reasons to
be suspicious of the 'great and glorious principles' by virtue of which
property was made to change hands so unceremoniously at the close of the
last century.

the present owners of most of the country houses in perigord, whether they
belong to the old families or the new families, whether they put the noble
particle before their names or not, have very much the same habits and
manners. not a few of them have never been to paris, and in speech they
often use old french forms, which sound strange in the ears of the
modernized society of the north. although the accent is often drawling
or sing-song, their language is more grammatically correct than that now
ordinarily used in conversation. they observe the true distinction of the
tenses with an exactitude that sounds stiff and pedantic to those french
people who move about, and who consider that they live in the 'world.' to
the unprejudiced foreigner, however, it is not unpleasant to hear this
old-fashioned literary french spoken in an easy, simple manner that removes
all suspicion of affectation.

in the relations of master and servant, something of the old regime still
survives. the master still says _tu_ and _toi_ to his servant; but if the
latter were to take the liberty of replying with the same pronoun, his
insolence would be considered quite unpardonable. and yet no people appear
to be troubled less with false pride than the class of whom i am speaking.
relatively large landowners, whose names count for a good deal in the
district, think there is nothing derogatory in sending a maidservant to
market to sell the surplus fruit and eggs. those who buy are equally
practical. they haggle over sous with their friends' servant just as if she
were a peasant driving a bargain on her own account. it is the exception,
however, when to this keen appreciation of money warm-hearted hospitality
and disinterested kindness are not joined.

there was a chateau combining the country house, the farm, and the ruin on
the summit of the steep hill that rose above our little island just beyond
the river. it often tempted me to climb to it, and one day at the end
of summer i wended my way up the stony path. i met with that courteous
reception which so rarely fails in france to place the visitor completely
at his ease. i was surprised to find how extensive the ramparts were, and
how easily the castle behind the modern house could have been rendered
habitable. but all the windows were open to the weather. a gothic chapel
with groined vaulting at the base of one of the towers had been turned into
a coach-house. following an old servant who carried a lantern along a dark
passage leading to an _oubliette_, i saw what looked like a large cattle
trough, and inquired the use of it in such a place. it was put to no
purpose now, was the reply, but it was intended for keeping a whole bullock
in salt. in the tumultuous ages it was always necessary to be prepared to
take immediate measures in view of a siege, and at no period more than
during the wars of religion, when the owners of these castles, whether they
were huguenots or catholics, had to be continually on the alert. when there
was fighting to be done, a salted bullock gave less trouble than a live
one.

the old man, having tied a string to the top of the lantern, let it down
through the round hole of the _oubliette_ until it touched the ground many
feet below. then he told me that, when the dungeon was discovered years
ago, immediately beneath the opening an old tree was found stuck about with
rusty blades and spikes, with their points turned upwards. this story was
confirmed by others.

in the garden on the edge of the cliff the myrtle flourished in a little
provence sheltered from the cold winds; the physalis--beautiful southern
weed--now laid its large bladders of a vivid scarlet along the edges of the
paths, and the walls flamed with the red fruit of the pomegranate.

the most important feudal ruin in this district is that of the chateau
de grignols, the cradle of the talleyrand family. it was raised by hely
talleyrand, seigneur de grignols, at the close of the twelfth century. much
of the outer wall and a few fragments of the interior buildings remain.

i lived a good deal upon the water when i was not in my hermitage under the
trees or wandering across country. i found in the water an ever-growing
interest and charm. it often drew me from my work, for my canoe was on the
canal only a few paces from my dwelling. on each side the high banks were
glorious with their many-coloured clothing of summer flowers. there were
patches of purple thyme, of blue stachys, and yellow gallium; there were
countless spikes of yellow agrimony and heads of wild carrot, and white
ox-eyes looked out from amidst the long grasses like snowflakes of summer.
near the water's edge, mingling with sedges, flags, marsh-mallows,
bur-reed, and alisma, were the golden flowers of the shrubby lysimachia
in dense multitudes, while from the canal itself rose many a spike of
water-stachys, with here and there blossoming butomus, near the fringe of
the banks. then there were the pond-weeds, and other true water-plants,
whose summer luxuriance nearly stopped the navigation of the canal, and
whose pollen in july, collecting near the locks, lay there upon the water
like a thick scum. as my little boat moved over them, i could note all the
wondrous beauty and delicacy of the strange foliage that lives below the
air, and preserves so much of the character of the earliest vegetation of
the earth.

it is twilight, and i am paddling up to the river, gliding now along by one
bank and now by another. a humming-bird moth, that seems to have been just
created, for the eye cannot follow its movement in the dusky air, appears
suddenly upon the topmost flower of a stachys, and in another moment it has
vanished. upon the broader and more open river the day appears to revive.
there is a faint lustre upon the distant chalky hills and their corn-fields
that rise against the quiet sky. but the pale moon just above them is
brightening; already the rays are glinting upon the water. a little later
the boat is moving up a long brilliant track, where small waves lap and
quiver like liquid fire. it is now night, and the forms of the alders in
the air and on the water have become weird and awful. i often come alone
at this hour, or later, to be filled with the horror of them. there is a
strong fascination in their terrible and fantastic shapes, which may be
because the sublime and the horrible are so thinly separated. rarely does
the same tree wear the same ghostly appearance when seen a second time, and
a shape that may seem to one person appallingly life-like may convey no
meaning to another.

had the gendarmes met me while water-wandering at night, they would
certainly have concluded that i was a fish-poacher. all fishing by night
in french rivers and streams is illegal, but it is much practised
notwithstanding.

there are many carp in the isle, weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds,
but they are very rarely caught. the river is full of very deep pools,
caused by the washing away of the sand down to the solid rock, and the carp
seldom get within reach of a net except when they are stirred up and washed
out of their lairs in time of flood. then, when an old fish gets entangled
in a net, it is almost certain to break through it, so that it is not with
a feeling of pure pleasure that the fisherman recognises by the weight and
tug that he has thrown his meshes over one of these monsters. nor does any
better success attend the angler--at all events, the angler who is known in
these parts. it is quite an extraordinary event when a carp weighing more
than five pounds is taken with the line. the bait commonly used is boiled
maize or a piece of boiled chestnut. there is another method of hooking
these fish which i have seen practised on the quays at perigueux. the
fisher has a very strong rod, and also a strong line many yards long, at
the end of which is fastened, not a bait, but a piece of lead two or three
inches in length. to this large hooks are fixed, which barbs turned in all
directions. the man, whose eyes have become very keen with practice, sees
some carp coming up or going down the stream, and, throwing the plummet far
out into the river, he draws it rapidly through the water, across the spot
where he believes the fish then to be. it is not often that he feels a tug,
but he does sometimes, and then follows a deadly struggle, which may result
in his landing a splendid carp that is worth more than he might earn by any
other industry in two days.

among the peasants in this part of perigord there is a deeply-engrained
superstitious horror of what is called a _rencontre_. if a person falls
suddenly ill, especially if his sickness be not a familiar ailment, he will
begin to probe his memory, and to ask himself if he has lately sat upon a
stone or the stump of a tree. if he remembers having done so, he murmurs,
unless he should be free from the popular superstition, 'ah! i thought so.
this is a _rencontre!_'--by which he means that he has met one of the three
unholy reptiles, the snake, the toad, or the lizard, although it was hidden
under the stone or stump.

'marie,' said i to an old farm woman who was hobbling about with a
rheumatic leg, 'what is the matter?'

oh, mossieu,' said she, 'it's a _rencontre_. i sat down the other day upon
a stone.'

this made me inquire what was meant by a _rencontre_.

i will only set down a few impressions of perigueux, there being already
quite enough written respecting the ancient capital of the petrocorii.
the upper part of the town commands a pleasant view of the valley of the
curving isle, with the wooded hills that lead away towards the upper and
wilder country of perigord; but it is in the lower town near the river,
where the odours are strong, that the interest really lies. here is the
cathedral of st. front, a church in the byzantine style of the tenth
century, and closely imitated from st. mark's at venice. it is impossible
to see it now, however, without regret and disappointment. in many it stirs
both sorrow and anger. it is no longer one of the most precious monuments
of old france. what we see now on the site of st. front is a new church,
scrupulously rebuilt, it is true, according to the original plan, and with
a great deal of the original material, but its interest is that which
belongs to a model: its venerable character, with all the associations of
the past, is gone. whether those responsible for the complete demolition of
the ancient structure when it threatened to fall and become a heap of ruins
were right or wrong in their decision is a technical question on which very
few persons are now competent to give an opinion. the plan of the church is
a greek cross, and, like st. mark's and st. sophia's, it has five domes;
but the building has, nevertheless, a feature of its own which makes it one
of the most original of churches. it possesses a byzantine tower.

[illustration: the tour de vesone.]

in common with many towns of southern france, perigueux shows remarkable
vestiges of different races and dominations. remnants of roman or
gallo-roman architecture stand with others that belong to the dawn of
mediaeval art, and others, again, that are marked by the florid and
graceful fancy of the renaissance. the ruins of the amphitheatre are
insignificant compared to those at nimes and arles, and there is no
beautiful example of roman art like the maison carree at nimes; but there
is an exceedingly curious monument of antiquity, which was long a puzzle to
archaeologists, but which is now generally believed to be the _cella_ of
a gallo-roman temple dedicated to the city's tutelary divinities. it is
called the tour de vesone, and, indeed, it was supposed for centuries to
have been originally a tower. its cylindrical shape and its height (ninety
feet) give it all the appearance of one. it is built of rubble, faced
inside and out with small well-shaped stones, and has chains of brick in
the upper part. the circle of the tower is no longer complete, for about a
fourth of the wall has been broken down from top to bottom. the ground
is strewn with fragments of immense columns and entire capitals, some
corinthian, others tuscan. these, doubtless, were parts of the peristyle,
which, with the exception of such scattered fragments, has quite
disappeared. there is something decidedly barbaric in the fantastic
structure that has come down to us, and it is difficult to understand the
motive of its height. such a cylinder rising far above the peristyle could
not have had a classic effect. this ruin stands in an open field, and the
foulness of the spot, although quite in accordance with the southern manner
of showing respect for antiquities, is nevertheless a disgrace to the
ideals of modern vesunna.

another curiosity of the lower town is the ruin of a very early mediaeval
castle, said to have been built by wulgrin, surnamed taillefer, the first
of the hereditary counts of perigord. close to this picturesque ruin is
one of the ancient gateways of the town. it goes by the name of la porte
normande, but its slightly pointed arch disposes of the suggestion that the
normans were in some manner concerned in its construction.

[illustration: the 'norman gate' at perigueux.]

what interested me most at perigueux was something that very few strangers,
or even townspeople, for that matter, ever see, because, it is hidden from
public view. this is a considerable fragment of one of the early walls
of the town, which, tradition says, was thrown up in great haste at the
approach of the normans during one of the incursions of these adventurers
up the valley of the dordogne and, its tributary, the isle, in the tenth
century. it is a bit of wall that speaks to us in a language by no means
common. it is not built of stones such as could be found anywhere in all
ages, but is put together with the fragments of temples and palaces which
even now tell of the power and splendour of rome. the shafts of fluted
columns, capitals wearing the acanthus, pieces of cornice and frieze, all
mortared together with undistinguishable rubbish, bear testimony in the
quiet garden of the ursuline convent to the vanity of human works. vesunna,
splendid city of southern gaul, completely latinized, with native poets,
orators, and historians speaking and writing the language of virgil and
cicero, raised temples, palaces, thermae, and a vast amphitheatre to be
used centuries later as material for building a wall to keep out the
northern barbarians!

[illustration: the dronne at bourdeilles.]




from perigueux to riberac (by brantome).


from perigueux i made my way to brantome in the neighbouring valley of the
dronne--a tributary of the isle, which nobody who has not stifled the love
of beauty in his soul can see without feeling the sweet and winning charm
of its gracious influence. between the two valleys are some fifteen miles
of chalky hills almost bare of trees, a dreary track to cross at any time,
but especially detestable when the dust lies thick upon the white road and
the summer sun is blazing overhead. but how delightful is the contrast
when, going down at length from these cretaceous uplands, where even the
potato plants look as if they had been whitewashed, you see below the
verdant valley of the dronne, that seems to be blessed with eternal spring,
the gay flash of the winding stream, the grand rocks that appear to be
standing in its bed, and the cool green woods that slope up to the sky
beyond! the pleasure grows as you descend, and when at length you reach the
little town you are quite enchanted with the grace and elegance, the poetic
and romantic charm, of the scene. although the church, with its tower half
built upon a rock, dates from the eleventh and twelfth centuries, the
influence of the sixteenth century is so strong that no other is felt. the
eye follows the terraces with graceful balustrades in the shadow of old
trees, dwells on the fanciful renaissance bridge, that looks as if its
first intention was to span the stream in the usual manner, but, having
gone some distance across, changed its mind, and turned off at an abrupt
angle; then the little pavilion in the style of francis i., connected with
a machicolated gateway, fixes the attention. there is something in the air
of the place which calls up the spirit of shakespeare, of spenser, and
of all the poets and romancers of the sixteenth century; you feel that
everything here belongs to them, that you are in their world, and that
the nineteenth century has nothing to do with it. upon these balustraded
terraces, beside the limpid river full of waving weeds, you can picture
without effort ladies in farthingales and great ruffs, gentlemen in high
hose and brilliant doublets; you can almost hear the lovers of three
centuries ago kissing under the trees--lovers like romeo and juliet, who
kissed with a will and meant it, and who were afraid of nothing. but
brantome has clearer and more precise associations with letters than
such as these, which belong purely to the imagination. its name has been
inextricably entangled with literature by pierre de bourdeilles, seigneur
de brantome, author of the famous and scandalous 'memoires'--terrible
chronicles of sixteenth-century venality, intrigue, and corruption, written
in a spirit of the gayest cynicism. brantome--he is known to the world by
no other name now--was the spiritual as well as the temporal lord here, for
he was abbot of the ancient abbey which was founded on this spot in the
eleventh century or earlier. his ecclesiastical function, however, was
confined to the enjoyment of the title and benefice, for if ever man was
penetrated to the marrow by the spirit of worldliness, it was pierre de
bourdeilles. what he has written about the women of his time is something
more than the critical observations of a chronicler who was also a caustic
analyst of the female character. such was his cynicism that he, the abbot
of brantome, laughed in his sleeve at the horrible strife of catholics and
huguenots in his own and neighbouring provinces. it is true that he fought
at jarnac against coligny, but the admiral had met him in the court of the
valois before these wars, and knew him to be an _abbe joyeux_, without
prejudices, if ever there was one. the astute chronicler played his cards
so well as to keep on safe terms with both sides, and it was by this
diplomacy of their lord and abbot that the inhabitants of brantome escaped
the sword and the rope when coligny and his terrible german mercenaries
entered the weakly-defended place on two occasions in 1569. on the first of
these coligny was accompanied by the young henry of navarre and the prince
of orange. they were all made very welcome by brantome, and treated by him
with 'good cheer' in his abbey. he was rewarded for his diplomatic talent,
for he tells us that no harm was done to his house, nor was a single image
or window broken in the church. no doubt he had turned to good profit his
distant relationship with madame de coligny. on the second occasion the
admiral merely hurried through brantome with his _reitres_ in full flight
after the bad defeat at montcontour.

the abbey church of brantome is not without beauty, but it is the tower
that is the truly remarkable feature. it was raised in the eleventh
century, and although the architect--probably a monastic one--observed the
prevailing principle of romanesque taste, he showed so much originality in
the design that it served as a model, which was much imitated in the middle
ages. it is not only one of the oldest church towers in france, but its
position is one of the most peculiar, it being built, not on the church,
but behind it, and partly grafted upon the rock.

[illustration: the abbey of brantome.]

of the old abbey little remains; but there is a cavern, formerly in
communication with the conventual buildings, which contains sculptures cut
upon the rock in relief, which are a great curiosity to ecclesiologists.
they are the work of the monks, who used this old quarry as a chapel, and,
it would appear, likewise as an ossuary in a limited sense, if the rows of
square holes cut in the rock were to serve as niches for skulls, as some
have maintained. one of the compositions in relief has given rise to
discussion among archaeologists. the first impression that it conveys is
that of an exceedingly uncouth representation of the last judgment, but
the marquis de fayolle's explanation, namely, that the idea which the
sculptor-monk endeavoured to work out here was the triumph of death over
life, meets with fewer objections. there are three figures or heads
symbolizing death, of which the central one wears a diadem that bristles
with dead men's bones. immediately below is death's scutcheon emblazoned
with allegorical bearings. on each side of this is a row of heads rising
from the tomb, in which a pope, an emperor, a bishop, and a peasant are
to be recognised. in the middle part of the composition are two kneeling
angels blowing trumpets, and above these is a vast and awful figure,
apparently unfinished, and scarcely more human in its shape than some
stalagmites i have met underground. are we to see here the eternal father,
or christ sitting in final judgment? it depends upon the interpretation
placed upon the work of the monk, who, with slow and painful effort, gave
fantastic life to his solemn thoughts in the gloom of this old quarry, from
which stone had been taken to build the church. he was a rude artist, such
as might have belonged to the darkest age, but certain ornamental details
of the bas-relief indicate that he was a man of the sixteenth century. the
walls of the cavern have been blackened by the damp, and these awful shapes
reveal themselves but slowly to the eye, so that they look like a vague and
dreadful company of ghosts advancing from the darkness.

a visit to this sepulchral cavern gives an appetite for lunch at the good
inn which is hard by, and at whose threshold sits or did sit a very fat,
broad-faced landlord, seemingly fashioned upon the model of an ideal
tapster of old time. here a _friture_ of the famous gudgeons of the dronne
is placed before the guest, whether the fishing be open or closed, and a
magistrate would feel as much aggrieved as anybody if the law were not
laughed at when its observance would lay a penalty upon his stomach. at
the hospitable board of this inn i made the acquaintance of a somewhat
eccentric gentleman who lived alone in a large old house, where he pursued
the innocent occupation of hatching pheasants with the help of hens. in
almost every room there was a hen sitting upon eggs or leading about a
brood of little pheasants. this gentleman was more sad than joyous, for he
could not take his handkerchief from his pocket without bringing out the
corpse of a baby pheasant with it--one that had been trodden to death by a
too fussy foster-mother. i owe him a debt for having led me a charming walk
by moonlight to see a dolmen--the largest and best preserved of all those i
had already seen in southern france and elsewhere.

it was not without a little pang that i broke away from the spell of
coquettish brantome and began my wanderings down the valley of the dronne.
a few miles below the little town the stream passes into the shadow of
great rocks. i looked at these with something of the regret that one feels
when awaking from a long dream of wonderland. i knew that they were almost
the last vestiges towards the west, in the watershed of the gironde, of
the stern jurassic desert, gashed and seamed with lovely valleys, and deep
gorges full of the poet's 'religious awe,' where i had spent the greater
part of three long summers. and now, on the outskirts of the broad plain or
gradual slope of undulating land that leads on from the darker and rockier
perigord, through the greenness of the lusty vine--led captive from the new
world and rejoicing in the ancient soil of france--or the yellow splendour
of the sunlit cornfields, towards the sea that rolls against the pine-clad
dunes, i felt tempted to turn from my course and go back to my naked crags
and stone-strewn wastes. but i did not go back. life being so short in this
world of endless variety, we cannot afford to return upon our path.

a little beyond where the double line of rocks ended, i saw a round tower
of unusual height with machicolations and embattlements, in apparently
perfect preservation, rising from the midst of what once must have been a
fortress of great strength, which on the side of the river had no need of a
moat, for it was there defended by the escarped rock, to the edge of which
the outer ramparts were carried. this was the castle of bourdeilles, the
seat of the family of which the abbe de brantome was a younger son. i was
soon able to get a closer view of it. it is one of the most instructive
remnants of feudalism in perigord, and one of the most picturesque, by the
contrast of its great gloomy keep and frowning ramparts with the peaceful
beauty of the valley below. the tall _donjon_, 130 feet high, and most of
the outer wall, are of the fourteenth century. the inner wall encloses a
sixteenth-century mansion, marked with none of the picturesqueness of the
renaissance period, but heavy and graceless. in the interior, however, are
sculptured chimney-pieces and other interesting details. this residence was
built by the sister-in-law of pierre de bourdeilles. the burg itself, which
lies close to the castle and is much embowered with trees, has something of
the open, spacious, and decorative air of brantome. it tells the stranger
that it has known better days. the broad terrace, planted with trees so as
to form a _quinconce_, where the people stroll and gossip in the summer
evenings, is quite out of keeping with a little place that has scarcely
more than a thousand inhabitants.

[illustration: chateau de bourdeilles.]

near the castle gateway is the 'logis des senechaux,' a small building of
the fifteenth century with turrets capped by extinguisher like roofs, and
within a stone's throw of this is a small church, dating from the twelfth
century, the artistic interest of which has been lamentably deteriorated by
renovation and scraping. the influence of the byzantine cathedral that rose
in the old roman city by the isle spread far, and numerous churches in
perigord bear witness to the imitative zeal which it inspired, especially
in the application of domes to the vaulting of the nave. this arrangement
is frequently to be found in connection with the pointed arch, and such is
the case at bourdeilles. the apse is beautiful, with its five tall windows
and its columns with corinthian capitals in the intervening wall spaces.
although the church is in no style that is recognised as pure, it is
typical of one that has been developed in the district, and which is by no
means without grace; but the scraping that it has undergone has robbed it
of the proper tint and tone of its age, and the ideal interest that belongs
to this.

but here is something from which the gray mantle that the centuries have
silently spun has not been lifted. i have gone down to the waterside to
follow the stream onward, and am held by the quiet charm of a half gothic
bridge that was thrown across it five or six hundred years ago; the
miller's house just below, with its bright little garden flaming with
flowers a few inches above the water, and two great wheels turning slowly,
slowly, as if time and change and the rush of life were the vain words of
tiresome fools. on the side of the bridge looking up-stream, each pier is
built out in the form of a sharp angle this was intended to lessen the push
of the current upon the masonry in time of flood. a great many old bridges
in guyenne show a similar design.

my road had now on one side the reedy dronne, and on the other overleaning
rocks topped with trees or shrubs, whose foliage reached downward as if it
were ever troubled by the futile longing to touch the cool green water, and
every little ridge or shelf was marked out by a line of ancient moss.
old alders had plunged their roots deep into the banks of the river, and
wherever the sunshine struck upon the upper leaves was a cicada scratching
out its monotonous note in joyous frenzy.

a long range of densely-wooded, rocky cliffs now stretched along the right
bank; but i, keeping to the road on the other side, soon left the stream
and rose upon a hill dotted with low juniper bushes. the scene in the
widening valley below was full of summer light and gladness. men were
mowing, and women were turning the fallen swathes in the waterside meadows,
and upon all the slopes above were patches of yellow corn ready for the
sickle. in the green depth between the hills the river flowed vaguely on in
the shadow of tall poplars, and was sometimes hidden by its reeds.

here and there upon the higher ground, half concealed by walnut-trees, were
small chateaux or farmhouses, with a castellated air derived from great
dovecots and towers, which last once served for the defence of the
manor-house or the little castle. when the fury of the religious wars
followed upon that tidal wave of dilettantism and sensuality which swept
over europe from the south to the north, and which we call the renaissance,
and when huguenots and leaguers gave such frequent dressings of blood to
the vineyards of perigord, every house and church that was in any way
fortified was used as a stronghold in the event of sudden attack.

from the broad landscape i turn to the wayside flowers: the agrimony, the
little lotus, the candy-tuft--getting rare now that i have left the arid
stony region--the blue scabious, and, pleasanter than all, the purple
patches of dwarf thyme.

it was not yet evening when i came to lisle, a rather large village near
the dronne. here i fell in with a plasterer, and he being a good-tempered
man, with some spare time on his hands, he offered to show me before dinner
the picturesque ruin of an old bridge, known in the district as the pont
d'ambon. on our way to the river he talked much, and especially about his
village, in which he took a very lively interest. it had not changed its
principles, he said, for a hundred years.

'and what are its principles?'

'republican. we don't go to church here, although there is no ill-will
towards the cure.'

'and is all the country about here republican?'

'oh no, not at all. there is a village close by that is full of religion.
we are often called savages. when the cure asked the commune to give him
200 francs a year for saying an extra mass on sundays, the majority of the
inhabitants signed their names to a paper offering him 300 francs a year if
he would say no mass at all.'

i said to myself that the cure of lisle was not to be envied the piece of
vineyard that he had been sent to look after. i had often heard stories
such as this. faction fighting provides the chief intellectual stimulus in
many a village and small town of france. where republicanism is strong, the
mayor's party is often at bitter feud with those who share the views
and uphold the authority of _m. le cure_. the sign that the 'advanced'
republicans give of their political faith is never to set foot inside the
church unless it be at a wedding or a funeral. but what is especially
worth the attention of the philosophical observer is the extent to which
prevailing ideas in politics and religion differ in the same district.
within a few miles of a commune where republicans and freethinkers have
complete control of local affairs, may be another that is altogether
royalist or bonapartist, and where the cure is both popular and powerful.
there is, moreover, a very marked difference in the character of the
inhabitants of neighbouring places. in one the prevailing characteristic
may be mildness and affability of manners, whereas in another it may
be truculence and incivility. neither the influence of politics nor of
religion sufficiently accounts for these differences in character. they
seem to rest rather upon obscure and remote causes, such as racial and
congenital tendencies. all this is especially observable in the south of
france, where the present population has been formed from the blood of so
many races, which is very unequally mixed even to this day.

when my talkative plasterer left the subject of local politics, he took up
that of the moon. like all country people, whether in france or in england,
he had the strongest faith in the influence of the moon upon the weather.
he, moreover, maintained that moonbeams had a very corrosive and
destructive action upon zinc. this fact, he said, had come under his
observation scores of times in his business, which was that of roofing as
well as plastering.

thus talking, we came to the bridge, or, rather, its sole remaining arch,
now almost completely hidden by ivy, briars, and other vegetation, by
which it has been gradually overgrown. the plasterer had a sense of the
picturesque, and he had not over-rated the beauty of this spot. a little
below the early gothic arch, from which the briars reached down to the
water, was an old mill, in the shadow of a high, overleaning rock, and
great trees made a vaulting over the grassy lane, at the end of which the
turning-wheel could be seen, with just a sparkle of evening sunshine upon
the dropping water.

the inn where i put up that night was a substantial hostelry, containing
all that was needful for the entertainment of man and beast. had i been a
_procureur de la republique_ the law could not have been broken in a more
solicitous manner than it was in my behoof. not only did i have gudgeons,
_en temps prohibe_, but also partridge. it was not until the bones were
carried out that i felt that i had missed an excellent opportunity of
setting a good example by declining to eat partridge in the month of june.

i must have been put into the best bedroom, for among other works of art
which it contained was a bridal wreath of orange-blossoms under a glass.
i surmised that when it decked the head of my hostess, her form would not
have taken up so much room in the kitchen as when i saw it downstairs,
passing with a slow and dignified movement in the midst of the saucepans
and platters. i have often slept in rooms where there have been bridal
orange-blossoms under glass. they always interest me, just as the faded
family photographs do which so frequently deck the walls of the same room.
they get me on the lines of thought or sentiment which make us enter when
we are by ourselves into all that is human.

the next morning, after seeing the church--a romanesque and gothic
structure of considerable beauty--i returned to the dronne, and, after
crossing it, continued upon the road eastward until i saw the picturesque
ruins of the chateau de marouette upon a hill above me. then i left the
road, and climbed the hill by a rocky path. this castle, dating from the
close of the sixteenth century, shows a blending of feudal architecture
with the renaissance style. in this respect it is like many others in the
district, but it is truly remarkable in having preserved an outer wall,
strengthened with round towers at intervals, and enclosing two or three
acres of land. the fortress was raised by a baron de jarnac, and must
have been one of the last built to combine the double character of family
residence and stronghold. the outer and inner ramparts, and the high,
frowning, machicolated keep, perched upon the rock and overlooking the
valley, prove that it was truly a _chateau-fort_, and one that ought to
have been able to give a very good account of itself. a fantastic effect
has been produced by attaching a plain modern house without any character
to the best-preserved parts of the ruin. agriculture must possess the
thoughts of those who are now living there. the wide space between the
outer and inner walls, as i saw it in the early sunshine of the june
morning, was a level floor of golden ears, nearly ready for the reaper.

a storm overnight had moistened the earth; the breath that came from the
flowery banks and the glistening leaves of oak and chestnut was very fresh;
all the birds that could sing were singing; the sound of the sweeping
scythe and the voices of mowers rose from the valley, and the spirit of
peace and gladness was over the land.

i took a road somewhat at random, and it led me by many windings away from
the dronne, up hills, where there were vines but no cornfields, and where
the wayside trees were chiefly plums, laden with fruit fast purpling. and
as i looked at the plums i thought of the time when, after being dried in
the sun, they would become 'prunes,' and be scattered about the world, many
of them, perchance, in england, where children would buy them with their
pennies, as i had bought others myself, when i never supposed that i should
walk by the trees that bore them under southern skies.

a road-mender whom i passed saluted me with the words, '_bon soir!_'
although the hour was eight in the morning. in these parts, however, _bon
soir_ is frequently said at all hours. it is a colloquial peculiarity.
another is to address or speak of a gentleman and a lady as '_ces
messieurs._'

at length i reached a plateau, where i saw not far off, in a hollow
surrounded by cornfields and fruit-trees, such a number of red roofs that
i concluded i must have come to the little town of montagrier. a young
peasant soon undeceived me: i was near the village of grand-brassac. it was
clear that i had gone much farther from the dronne than i had intended,
but, after all, it mattered little where i wandered. i now said that i
would see grand-brassac, and that i might find something there worth the
walk. i was rewarded beyond aught that i had expected or hoped for.

here i found a very remarkable byzantine-gothic church of the thirteenth
century, with a richly decorated front in strong contrast to the defensive
motive so clearly expressed by the solidity of the structure, the smallness
of the windows, and especially by the height of the entrance--some ten feet
above the level of the ground. it is reached by steps. over the doorway,
which has a pointed arch ornamented with a star moulding, is a semicircular
compartment containing several figures in high relief, the central one of
which represents the virgin enthroned. no satisfactory explanation of
the others has yet been found. beneath the compartment is a row of very
fantastic bracket-heads, supposed to represent the vices. above it is
a canopy with sculptured medallions on the under-surface, where the
symbolical lamb may be recognised amongst winged dragons and other
monsters. close to these is a monkey playing on the violin. above this
canopy is another, shaped like a low gable, and forming the upper frame of
a further set of figures in relief, larger than those in the compartment
below. the central and highest figure is that of christ teaching. the
virgin is kneeling on the right, and st. john on the left. st. paul is
shown with the book of his epistles, and st. peter, wearing a bishop's
mitre, is holding his keys. among other details of this curious facade
is the figure of a kneeling knight in a coat of mail. upon the exterior
side-walls are roman arches _en saillie_, resting upon corbels and very
wide pilaster-strips that are almost buttresses. in the interior, the
byzantine influence is very apparent in the three domes, which combine with
the gothic vaulting of the narrow, dimly-lighted nave. the main walls are
carried so high as to hide the roof of the domes, and this goes far to give
to the church that air of a mediaeval fortress which at once impresses the
beholder.

as the fortune of the road had cast me upon this village, i made up my mind
to accept pot-luck here, for the morning was no longer young, and i knew
not how far i might have to trudge before finding better quarters. so i
resolved to take my chance at what looked like the best inn in the place,
although it was a very rustic hostelry that would have repelled a wanderer
less seasoned than myself to the vicissitudes of the highways and byways. i
had, however, a cool little back-room with whitewashed walls to myself,
and through the small square window near the table where i sat i could see
something of the sunny world, with bits of tiled roof and green foliage,
as well as the lemon-coloured butterflies that fluttered from garden to
garden. there was no lack of food in the auberge, for a pig had been very
recently killed. there were several dishes, but they were all made up
from the same animal. when something fresh came, i thought, 'this, at all
events, must be mutton or veal'; but although it may have been cunningly
disguised with tomatoes or garlic, i perceived that it was pork again. it
was long after this adventure that i could look at a pig with a lenient and
unprejudiced mind.

when i left grand-brassac, i so shaped my course as to return to the valley
of the dronne, but at a point much lower than that where i had last crossed
the river. the weather was now very sultry; not a breath of wind stirred,
and thunder-clouds were gathering in the sky. as the sun glared between the
layers of vapour, the cicadas screamed from the tops of the walnut-trees,
while i upon the dazzling white road felt that there was no need of so much
rejoicing.

a great dark cloud with fiery fringe now stretches far up the sky from the
south, and there is a constant long-drawn-out groan of distant thunder.
this storm is no loiterer; it is coming on at a rapid pace, and it will be
a fierce one. still, the haymakers keep in the meadow hard by the road,
working for dear life to fill the waggon, to which a pair of oxen are
harnessed, and to get it safely to the village on yonder hill before the
floodgates of heaven are opened. i hasten on to this village, and reach
it just before the rain begins to fall. it is almost deserted; everybody
appears to be in the fields.

on the very top of the hill is a little old church surrounded by cypresses
and acacias, and as the sun, about to vanish within the folds of the cloudy
pall that is already drawn up to its flaming edge, darts burning rays upon
the still motionless leaves, the cicadas again scratch out their note with
the blind zeal of fiddlers who have made too merry at the marriage-feast.

according to my wont, i pay a visit to the dead, who lie scattered all
around the old church. scattered do i say? why, the very ground on which i
walk is made up of them. when another dead villager is buried, what occurs
is merely a displacement of human remains. as one body goes down, the bones
and dust of others come up to the surface. wherever i walk i see bones, and
if i were an anatomist i could tell the use and place of each in the human
economy. one might well suppose that in these rural districts, where land
is of so little value, there would be but slight disturbance of dead men's
bones. observation, however, tells a very different story. these country
churchyards are very small, and nobody but the stranger seems to think that
there is any reason why they should be larger. there is little or no buying
of graves 'in perpetuity' here, and very little grave-marking, except by
mounds and wooden crosses. years pass quickly, while the briar and the
thistle and the bindweed grow apace, like the new interests and affections
that spring up in the minds and hearts of the mourners. who are they who
carry flowers to the graves of their grandfathers?

think of the population of an entire village being swallowed up every
fifty or seventy years by this patch of ground that would make but a small
garden, and of this movement going on century after century! it is surely
no matter for marvel that it has become as difficult to hide the bones as
the pebbles whenever a bit of soil has been lately turned. they lie
even about the sides of the rough path that goes round the church. some
fragments are so honeycombed that they are as light in the hand as
touchwood; others have undergone little, if any, chemical change. here
people must often walk upon the bones of their not very remote ancestors;
but they know, if they think about the matter at all, that their turn will
come to be similarly treated by their own descendants. there is no better
place for meditating upon all the vanities than one of these old rural
cemeteries. turn not away, you other wanderers who may chance to stray into
these little fields consecrated to the dead, and excuse your unwillingness
to reflect by muttering, 'horrible!' there is nothing horrible, after all,
in these poor bones. what matters it whether they are bleached by the sun
or blackened by the clay? it is good for you and for me to see them here,
and to realize how soon all men are forgotten, how quickly their bones,
mingling with others, give no more clue to the individual life to which
they once belonged than a particle of dust that dances in the sunbeam does
to the matter from which it parted.

it is not good, however, to stay moralizing in a cemetery until a
thunderstorm bursts over your head. i remained so long here that i had to
run for refuge in a manner quite out of keeping with my solemn train of
thoughts. i entered the first doorway that i saw open, and thus i found
myself in a cobbler's shop. the cobbler was seated on a stool at a low
table covered with tools and odds and ends in the middle of the room,
sewing a boot, which he held to his knee with a strap passed under his
foot. his apprentice was sitting near munching a piece of bread. both
looked up with an astonished, not to say startled, expression when i
appeared simultaneously with a dazzling flash of lightning, followed
immediately by a terrific thunder-clap. the thought expressed in the eyes
of the cobbler as he looked up was, 'are you a thunderbolt, or robert the
devil?'

i spoke to him and calmed him; but although he was satisfied that i was
human, he evidently could not make me out. nor was this surprising, for
the village--st. victor by name--lies quite off the track of all but the
inhabitants of a small district. the man, however, made me welcome,
and offered me a chair. the sky was now the colour of dull lead,
the lightning-flashes were almost momentary, and the thunder roared
incessantly. mingling with this sound and that of the splashing rain was
another--the clang and scream of the bell in the church-tower. it was rung
as the tocsin, with that quick and wild movement which had startled me
elsewhere in the depth of night with the cry of 'fire! fire!' the bell,
however, was not rung now to give the alarm of fire, and to summon
everybody to lend a helping hand in extinguishing the flames, but to
persuade the storm either to go somewhere else or to act with moderation.
this old custom--now dying out--is no doubt founded on the religious belief
that when the church bell is rung with faith a storm will do no harm; but
the country people join to the religious idea the notion that the vibration
of the atmosphere, caused by the ringing, dissipates the storm or turns it
in another direction. unfortunately for the ancient custom, churches have
frequently been struck by lightning at the time when the bells were being
rung, and science is positive in declaring that the electric fluid is
attracted by an artificial commotion of the atmosphere. on the _causses_ of
the quercy, the peasants place bottles of holy water on the tops of their
chimneys as a protection against lightning. the idea is that the evil
power will not strike the dwelling of those who put up a sign that their
habitation is blessed. these bottles on the chimney-tops puzzled me
greatly, until at length i inquired the reason why they were there.

there was to me something exceedingly grand and elevating in this storm
that raged upon the hilltop, while the bell in the open tower, tossing like
a cask on the sea, proclaimed over all the house-tops and the fields the
fierceness of the struggle between the celestial guardians of the church
and village, and the demons that thronged the air. i felt that i might
never have such an opportunity as this again, and wished to make the most
of it. the cobbler nearly lost his temper at seeing me so wickedly elated.
perhaps he thought that i might draw down a judgment upon myself, and that
he ran some risk of being included in it for having harboured me. he not
only looked frightened, but frankly owned that he was afraid. he was one
of those men--of whom i have known several--who can never overcome their
horror of a thunderstorm. at length the storm began to move off and the
bell stopped ringing; then the cobbler became quite cheerful. he brought
out a great jar of spirit distilled from plums, and insisted upon my
drinking some with him. he also invited me to 'break a crust,' but this
offer i declined. before i took leave of the good-natured man, he seemed to
have fairly shaken off the bad impression i had made upon him by watching a
thunderstorm with interest and pleasure.

the sky having cleared, i continued my journey towards riberac, and reached
the dronne when the stormy day was ending without a cloud. there was hardly
a breath of wind to shake the drops from the still dripping leaves, and the
last groan of distant thunder having died away, there would have been deep
silence but for the warbling of blackbirds and nightingales.




the desert of the double


i am now at riberac--the ribeyrac of dante's commentators, who generally
prefer to abide by the old spelling. one might expect this ancient little
town to offer much interest to the archaeologist, but it does not. its
interest lies almost wholly in its literary associations of arnaud daniel,
and of him mainly because dante chanced to meet him in purgatory. here
was the castle--there is nothing of it now--where the thirteenth-century
troubadour was born whom petrarch described as '_il grande maestro
d'amore,_' and whom dante made guido speak of as a poet in these words of
unqualified praise:

  'questi ch' io ti scerno
  fu miglior fabbro del parlar materno:
  versi d'amore e prose di romanzi
  soverchio tutti.'

dante having asked for the name on earth of this gifted soul, the
troubadour replied in the tongue that he had learned from his mother's lips
at riberac:

  'jeu sui arnaulz che plor e vai cantan.'

arnaud's modern critics admire him less than did dante and petrarch; but he
had a gift of sweet song, and he owed it doubtless in no small measure
to the influence of the lovely dronne, on whose banks he must have often
rambled in childhood--that season when impressions are unconsciously laid
up which shape the future life of the intellect. no englishman should pass
through arnaud's birthplace with indifference, for he was the first to put
into literary form the story of lancelot of the lake.

although arnaud daniel's castle has quite disappeared, much of the church,
that was almost a new one in his time, still remains. it was originally
byzantine-romanesque, but in the sixteenth century it underwent fantastic
restoration, and was badly married to another style without a name. what
struck me most on entering was the religious darkness through which one
sees the suspended lamp of the sanctuary gleaming like a star, and behind
it the dim outline of the altar. this crypt-like appearance is explained
by the absence even of a single window in the apse, which is covered by a
semi-dome. the romanesque tower is very low and broad, with a broach spire
roofed with stones.

what a contrast to the deep shadow of the church was the brilliant white
light that i met outside, and to the grave-like silence the sawing sound of
the cicadas, drunk with sunshine, in the neighbouring tree-tops!

i set out from riberac to cross that tract of country between the dronne
and the isle which is known as the double. it is still one of the most
forlorn wildernesses in all france; but, like the camargue, it has been
much changed of late years by drainage and cultivation, and is destined
to become productive and prosperous. for incalculable centuries it had
remained a baneful solitude, overgrown with virgin forest, except in
the hollows between the low hills, which succeed one another like the
undulations of the sea; and here, almost hidden in summer by tall reeds
and sedges, lay the pools and bogs that poisoned the air and rendered
the climate abominable. in the midst of this marshy, cretaceous desert,
stretching between the isle and its tributary, the dronne, and close to a
wretched fever-stricken village called echourgnac, a small community of
trappist monks established themselves in 1868. they did not go there merely
as ascetics fleeing from the world, but also as philanthropists, prepared
to sacrifice their lives for the good of humanity. their mission was to
drain and to cultivate this most unhealthy part of the double, and to
improve the condition of the peasants who eked out a miserable existence
there. with what success the monks have applied themselves to their task
of changing the climate by drainage, and assisting the peasants in their
struggle, is proved by the sentiments of the people towards them. when,
under the third republic, the unauthorized religious orders were expelled
from france, the inhabitants of the double threatened to resist by force
any official interference with the trappists at echourgnac, and the
agitation was so great that the counsel given by the local authorities
to the government was to leave these monks alone. it was acted upon. the
trappists, like the carthusians, were left undisturbed in this and in other
parts of the country.

when i had turned south-westward, on the road to montpont, i saw nothing
for five or six miles that corresponded to what i had been told of the
double. yellow corn-fields and green meadows covered the fertile plain. it
was not until i had passed the village of st. vauxains, and had reached the
top of the line of hills beyond, that the character of the country changed
decisively. now, as i left the broad and favoured valley, and reached
the brow of the hilly range that helps to keep the water stagnant and
imprisoned in the double, meadow and corn-field grew scarcer and scarcer,
and then passed altogether into the wooded moorland. cultivation returned
at intervals, then vanished again. i was upon an undulating plateau with
far-off higher hills closing the horizon all around. the reclaimed land was
in the hollows or upon the surrounding slopes; but here, too, the scrubby
forest might be seen stretching for miles without a break. the heat was
intense, and the sky had become stormy.

when i left riberac the blue above was without a spot, but now heavy masses
of cloud were hovering in the sky. as yet there was not wind enough to
rustle a leaf, and the dwarf oaks gave little shelter from the ardent sun.
the air that rose from the heather and bracken was like the breath of a
furnace. there were a few scattered cottages and farm-buildings, lying
chiefly near the road, and the turkeys and geese that roamed around them
were a sign that they were inhabited; but i rarely saw a human being.

i was resting awhile by a reedy pool fringed with gorse and heather, and
was listening to the oriels answering one another upon their pan-pipes,
when i saw coming towards me a figure which might have disturbed me very
much had i been living in those days when--if there is any truth in
legendary lore--the devil only needed half a pretext for forcing his
society upon lonely travellers. this man--for man it was--had a face
so overgrown with coal-black hair that very little could be seen of
it excepting the eyes and nose. beard, whiskers, and moustache were
inseparably mixed up. what skin was visible through the matted jungle of
hair was little less swarthy than a hindu's. all the upper part of this
astonishing head was hidden by a large hat of black straw, shaped like
an inverted washing-basin. the rest of the figure was clad in a frock of
dark-brown serge, with hanging hood. not expecting to see a trappist where
i was, i was startled for a moment by the apparition, but i quickly guessed
that this was one of the brothers of the still distant monastery who had
been sent out on some little expedition into the district. as he passed,
he raised his hat just enough to show that the close-cropped black hair
beneath it was turning gray.

the road led me through a little village where there was an old romanesque
church. there were numerous archivolts over the broad portal, and above
these was a horizontal dog's-tooth moulding with grotesque heads at
intervals; but time had effaced most of the carving. all about the church
the long grass and gaudy mulleins stood over the bones of men and women
who, like their parents before them, had clung to their old homes in the
midst of the pestilential marshes, suffering continually from malaria,
watching their children grow paler and paler, and yet never thinking of
surrender. what a strange combination of heroism, obstinacy, and stupidity
do we find in human nature! but now things had changed here. there was an
air of prosperity in the village, and the people said that the fever had
almost left them.

while crossing another bit of wild and deserted country, i saw the dark
gleam of poisonous pools nearly hidden by sallows and reeds. the vibration
of my footsteps disturbed the vipers that lay near the hot road; they slid
down the banks and curved out of sight amongst the roots of the heather.
these reptiles abound in the double; conditions that are baneful to men are
healthful to them. the sighing of the pines added to the sadness of the
land, for these trees now appeared in clumps along the way-side, and the
storm-wind had begun to blow. the sun was shining obliquely through a
dun-coloured haze when i reached the village of echourgnac in a
cultivated valley. here the cattle and the green fields were signs of
the cheese-making industry carried on at the monastery. the conventual
buildings were now visible on the top of the neighbouring hill, with the
church spire higher against the sky than all the rest. i made my way
towards this little fortress of asceticism hidden from the world amidst the
woods and marshes.

i had made up my mind to spend the night with the trappists, even if i was
obliged to accept their charity and to allow myself to be classed with
those tramps who have no literary pretext for their vagabond ways. indeed,
i had been given to understand by all to whom i had spoken on the subject
in the district, that the reverend fathers gave money sometimes to the
wayfarer, but accepted none in return for food and shelter. that part of me
in which the conventional is concentrated said: 'stop at the inn;' but the
other part, which has the curiosity and the errantry of the man who has
never been perfectly civilized, said: 'go on, and whatever happens pass the
night with the trappists.'

having reached the monastery gate, the next thing to do was to pull the
bell. the porter opened first his wicket and then the door. the superior
could not be approached for a quarter of an hour, so i was asked to wait
in the lodge. thus i had an opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
porter. although he was very much in religion, having been a brother at
echourgnac since the foundation, he might be termed without disrespect 'a
jolly old soul.' he was, as he said, a man who had no pretensions whatever
to be learned. his lack of book knowledge made him all the more natural.
his age appeared to be about sixty-five, but he had a body that was still
robust and vigorous under his dirty brown frock, although he had been
living so many years on bread and cheese and vegetables, and short commons
withal. the post of porter must have helped him not a little to bear up
against the discipline, for it allowed him the use of his tongue, and the
rule of silence would have been a more severe trial to him than to many
another. he poured out some beer for me from a great stone jar that he kept
near at hand. i had heard that the trappists of echourgnac added to their
other accomplishments the arts of beer-brewing and wine-making, and was
therefore not surprised by the porter's kindly offer; but when i noticed
the yellow colour and soup-like consistency of the fluid that he poured out
for me, i was sorry that i had accepted it.

'it is a little thick,' said the trappist, whose keen eyes had noticed that
there was a lack of warmth in the manner in which i took the glass from his
hand, 'but the beer is good. it is rather new.'

'it must be very nourishing,' i replied, after heroically draining the cup
of tribulation.

'have some more?' said this good-natured trappist as he raised the jar
again. i saved myself from a second dose by an energetic '_merci!_' and
changed his thoughts by asking him if he had been a long time at the
monastery.

'i was one of the first lot who came here in july, 1868. there were
twenty-two of us in all, _peres et freres_, and two or three weeks
afterwards seventeen were down with fever. you can have no idea of what it
was here five-and-twenty years ago. the country was unfit for human beings.
the people went shivering about in the heat of summer wrapped up as they
would be in the depth of winter. it was pitiful to see them.'

he then entered into details respecting the clearing of the land, the
draining of the pools, etc. suddenly remembering the flight of time, he
disappeared with my card, and left me in charge of the lodge. presently he
came back, and told me that the reverend father was unwell, and could not
see anybody, but that i could pass the night in the monastery if i wished
to do so. the porter led me through a great farmyard, then through a
doorway into a room, in the centre of which was a large table, and in
the corners were four very small and low wooden bedsteads with meagre
mattresses, a couple of sheets, and a coloured quilt.

when we entered, two men were seated at the table eating bread and
cheese and drinking home-brewed beer. one was quite young, perhaps
five-and-twenty, and it was to him that the brother who parleyed with the
outer world at the gate introduced me, with the recommendation that he
should do all in his power for me, adding, with an emphasis by which he
gained my friendship for ever: '_je reponds sur vous._' the young man said
that as soon as he had finished his own meal he would see to my supper. i
begged him to take his time, as i was in no hurry.

the good porter, still solicitous, asked where i was going to sleep, and
the young man, who i afterwards learnt was a postulant, pointed to a bed
in one of the corners. i was then left with my two new acquaintances. the
postulant had very soon finished, and having brushed the crumbs off his
part of the bare board with his hand, he disappeared, to see what he could
find for me in the kitchen. the man who remained also brought his meal to
a close, but he did not whisk the crumbs away; he brushed them into little
heaps, and, wetting his forefinger, raised them by this means to his mouth.
he was about fifty; his chin was shaved, but he wore whiskers, and a long
rusty overcoat hung nearly down to his heels. he was very quiet, and i
thought he looked like a repentant cabman. there was something about the
man that excited my curiosity, but i felt that, considering where i was, it
would be very bad taste to put any leading questions to him respecting his
history. i nevertheless found a way of getting into conversation with him,
and he did not need much persuasion to talk. he was rather incoherent,
but i gathered from what he said that he had wandered a good deal from
monastery to monastery, now in the world and now almost 'in religion,'
without finding anchorage anywhere.

'the world,' he said, 'is like a rotten plank, and we are like smoke that
comes and goes. if we do not think of eternity, we are shipwrecked.'

feeling, perhaps, that something in the world was a little more solid after
the bread and cheese and beer than it was before, he was working himself up
to a communicative humour, and i was beginning to hope that i should
soon know what sort of a character he really was, when the return of the
postulant changed his ideas as effectually as if a bucket of water had been
thrown in his face. when he ventured to speak again, the younger man told
him that it was six o'clock, and that the whole community was now expected
to observe the rule of silence.

'do not be angry,' he added, as he heard the other mutter something that
escaped me.

'i am not angry,' replied the owner of the long coat as he glided softly
out of the room.

i was now alone with the postulant, who made matters pleasanter for me by
giving a generous interpretation to the rule of silence in so far as it
applied to himself. he told me that, as i had come after the hour of the
second meal, the _frere cuisinier_ was not in the kitchen, but at _salve;_
consequently there was no possibility of getting even an omelet made
for me. after looking, however, into all the corners of the kitchen, my
providential man had discovered some cold macaroni, which he presented to
me in a small tin plate. i do not know how it had been cooked, but its
very dark colour made me suspicious of it. although i knew it was quite
wholesome, i thought it safer to leave it untouched, and to be satisfied
with bread and cheese. now, this cheese, made by the trappists of the
double upon the port-salut recipe, which is a secret of the order, is of
excellent quality, and deserves its reputation. the monastery bread, made
from the wheat grown by the monks, was of the substantial and honest kind
which in england would probably be called 'farmhouse bread,' although the
great wheel or trencher-shaped loaves of the french provinces might cause
some surprise there. my meal, therefore, might have been worse than it was,
and as it was given to me for nothing, it would have been very bad manners
not to appear pleased. the truth is, the novelty of my position--that of
a tramp taken in and fed on charity--amused me so much that i found
everything perfect. i had an idea 'at the back of the head' that i should
find a way of squaring matters financially with the holy men, but i did
not wish to tell it even to myself then. i must confess that when a black
bottle was placed beside the bread and cheese on the bare table, i was weak
enough to hope that it contained some of the excellent white wine which i
was told the trappists made; but when the liquor came out the colour of pea
soup, i recognised the religious beer which had already disappointed me. as
i could get nothing better, and the water being distinctly bad, the most
sensible thing to do was to be reconciled to the beer, and in this i
succeeded very fairly. necessity is not the mother of invention only. the
wine, i afterwards learnt, is only drunk at the convent in winter. much of
it is sold to priests for sacramental use.

when i had taken the keen edge off my hunger, i began to feel a fresh
interest in the postulant. somehow, he did not appear to me to be of the
stuff out of which monks, especially trappists, are made, although i know
that in all that relates to the interior workings of a man there are
no outward signs to be relied upon. there is puzzle enough in our own
contradictions to discourage us from trying to find consistency in others;
but we try all the same. we have a fine sense of proportion and harmony
when we analyze our fellow-beings, but none whatever when we turn the
faculty introspectively. the sanctimonious undertone in which this young
man spoke struck me as being false, for there was nothing in him that i
could discover which linked him to the ascetic ideal of life. but then the
question arose, why was he there? he was strong and healthy; he had a deep
colour on his cheeks, and a humorous twinkle in his eye. he did not look as
if he had been crossed in love, or had received any of the scars of passion
such as might account for his wish to become a trappist. he had seen
something of the world. he had been to chili, among other countries, and
the war there had ruined his prospects, so he told me. i concluded, from
what he said, that on his return to france he had sought a temporary refuge
with the trappists, and that he preferred to remain under the shelter that
he had found there rather than run the risk of worse in the struggle for
life outside. becoming more confidential, he told me that what was most
difficult to be borne by those in his position was the rule of absolute
submission and obedience.

i had not been at the table long, when this postulant glided out of the
room, saying:

'i will see if there is a way of getting another bottle of beer.'

presently he returned with a bottle under his arm, and then i learnt that
the abbot had given orders that i was to pass the night _dans la chambre
de monseigneur._ the prospect of sleeping in the bishop's bed furnished me
with a conscientious reason for not drawing the cork from the second
bottle of monastic barley-brew; but my companion, who was more or less in
religion, did not give me a chance of refusing, for he drew it himself and
filled two glasses.

'_nous allons trinquer,_' said he.

we clinked glasses, and talked with greater freedom, although the postulant
still spoke under his breath--it was a habit that he had fallen into. we
were interrupted by a scuffling outside, and by the opening of the door. a
couple of monks in brown frocks were on the threshold. a small gray-bearded
brother with a bent back held in one hand a pewter plate and in the other
a little basin of the same metal. he was the _frere cuisinier_, who had
returned from _salve_, and he had come to offer me some vegetable soup
and some more macaroni, both of which i declined. not a word did these
trappists say, but they carried on with the postulant a conversation in
dumb show as to what my requirements would be on the morrow. they stroked
their noses, rubbed their fingers together, and grimaced so expressively
all on my account that i was much amused, and would have liked to laugh
outright; but i durst not in such company.

when they had left i took a stroll outside, for as yet i felt no
inclination to go to bed, notwithstanding that a bishop had slept upon the
same mattress that was waiting for me. keeping within the convent bounds,
where no woman is allowed to set her foot--that troublesome foot whose
imprint may be found on most of the paths that lead to a trappist monastery
in the obscure forest of human motives--wandering beyond the buildings,
but still within the enclosure, i came to a bit of waste land covered with
heather and gorse that overlooked the wooded wilderness towards the west,
as a headland bluff overlooks the sea.

the sun had set, and the wild spirits of the storm had drawn a translucent
drapery of vapour from the dark thundercloud hovering overhead to where the
fringe of the forest broke the blood-stained bar upon the horizon's verge,
and this luminous orange-coloured curtain was crossed every moment upwards
and downwards by silvery shafts of lightning. such an effect of sunset
combined with storm was like a new revelation of nature, and the sublimity
of the spectacle would have held me fast to the patch of wild heath if the
rain had not begun to fall in splashes. the long summer day was over, and
the night came forth in trouble and with gushing tears. the roar of the
thunder grew louder, and the flash of the lightning brightened every
minute.

i returned to the monastery, and found the postulant quite anxious to
have done with me, and to put me into the bishop's room. he was
sleepy--everybody gets sleepy in these country places at about nine
o'clock, irrespective of canonical hours, whereas i grow livelier, like
a night-bird, as the dusk deepens. all the monks must have been in their
cells snoring with the clear conscience which is the gift of the day that
has been well filled up when i reluctantly entered the only room in the
place that had any pretension to comfort, but which to me was like a
prison. i was making an effort to acquire the virtue of resignation, when
the postulant spoilt the mood by speaking again of beer. had he picked up
in his wanderings the notion that an englishman could not live unless he
were kept well supplied with beer, or had he formed an exaggerated idea of
the seductiveness of the strange but innocent liquor that the trappists
brewed? whatever his thoughts may have been, he darted away in spite of my
endeavour to stop him, and presently reappeared with another black bottle.
i knew that he had not obtained it without diplomacy, and that he had made
my unquenchable thirst the excuse; but by this time i had perceived that
his solicitude was not wholly unselfish. he muttered something about
'charity' as he filled a glass for me, notwithstanding my refusal; then
vanished with the bottle. he had promised to wake me at two o'clock for
matins.

when left alone, i made an inspection of the bishop's room. it was spacious
enough for fifty people to dance in, and the furniture would not have been
greatly in the way. the stones which made the floor had no carpet, not even
the _descente de lit_, which in france is considered indispensable even
when the floor is of wood. in the corner was a low wooden bedstead with
dingy curtains suspended from a rafter, and a paillasse of maize-leaves
with a thin wool mattress above it. coarse hempen sheets and a coloured
coverlet completed the bedding. by the side against the wall was a broad
_prie-dieu_, with a lithograph just above it of the holy child bearing the
cross. a plain table in the centre without a cloth, a _secretaire_ with
high crucifix attached, another bare table with washing-basin, jug, and
folded towel, with a few chairs and several religious prints, made up the
furniture.

this room was on the ground-floor, and looked out upon a long covered
terrace, with the farmyard immediately beyond. i opened the sashes--i had
already prevailed upon the postulant not to fasten the shutters--and,
having blown out the candle, i lit my pipe. i suppose if i had had any
sense of propriety i should have refrained from smoking in the bishop's
room; but what was i to do, a prisoner there at nine o'clock in the
evening, and not a bit sleepy? if it had been a fine evening, i do not
think i could have resisted the temptation to jump out of the window and to
stroll back to the patch of imprisoned moor. first a cat and then a great
dog came sneaking along, and i tried to get on friendly terms with them
from the window; but they, too, seemed to have renounced the world, with
all its pomps and vanities, to conform to the trappist rule, for each of
them looked at me with pity and reproach out of the corner of the eye, and
described a wide semicircle, at the risk of getting wet, in order not to
be drawn into conversation. but the storm, at all events, had not been
silenced; the thunder growled and groaned, and every half-minute the
lightning lit up all the stones and puddles of the great farmyard, beyond
which my vision was cut off by the roofs of the outbuildings.

notwithstanding the unpleasantness of being shut up, i felt that if the
management of the weather had been left to me i could not have arranged
things better for my first night in a trappist monastery. here i was in the
midst of the desolation of the double under the same roof with men who were
driven into this shelter by the desolation of their souls. tempest-tossed
by the conflict of the spirit and the flesh, wounded, perhaps, by secret
griefs and humiliations, strong, perchance, in the eyes of others, while
never sure of themselves from one hour to another, putting out upon the
same sea again and again only to be thrown back upon the same desert shore,
they at length settled down here, and they must have done so with the calm
conviction that they had found the medicine to suit their kind of sickness
in a life of incessant punishment of self and labour for others.

it was about eleven when i felt tired enough to lie down. i had not been in
this position long when something bit me. i thought i knew the enemy, but
i dared not whisper its name even to myself, for i was overcome by its
condescension. from a bishop to me was a fall in the social scale that
ought to have made the most voracious insect tremble on the edge of the
precipice. maybe it did tremble before it yielded to temptation and forgot
its dignity.

the storm continued all night with intervals of calm. a little before two
o'clock the bell was rung for matins. the clang of the metal must have been
heard clear and shrill far over the double, even when the storm seemed to
be rending the black sails of the clouds asunder. the postulant fetched me,
as he had promised, and he led me through a labyrinth of passages to the
church. although the building was almost in darkness, i could see that
it was in the pointed style, and that it was marked by a cold elegance
befitting its special purpose. the nave was divided near the middle by a
gothic screen of wood artistically carved, although the ornamental motive
had been kept in subjection. the half that adjoined the sanctuary was
somewhat higher than the other, and here the trappist fathers had their
stalls. the brothers' stalls were in the lower part. i was led to a
place below the screen. the office had already commenced; the monotonous
plain-chant by deep-toned voices had reached me in the corridors. perhaps
it was half an hour later when the chanting ceased. the lamps were darkened
in the stalls above the screen--in the lower part there was but one very
small light suspended from the vault--then the monks knelt each upon the
narrow piece of wood affixed to his stall for this purpose, and for half an
hour with heads bent down they prayed in silence, while the thunder groaned
outside, and the lightning flashed through the clerestory windows. to the
trappists, who day after day, year after year, at the same hour had been
going through the same part of their unchanging discipline, heedless
whether the stars shone overhead or the lightning glittered, there was
nothing in all this to draw their minds from the circle of devotional
routine: i alone felt as if i was going down into my grave. the gray light
that was now making the ribs of the vaulting dimly visible was like the
dawn of eternity breaking through the brief night called death, which is
not perhaps so dark as it seems. at three o'clock the chill and awful
silence was broken by the white-robed prior, who rose from his low posture
like a dead man in his shroud, and began to chant in another tone and
measure from what had gone before. it had in it the sadness of the wind
that i heard moaning in the pine-tops on the moor before the storm broke.
the voice was strong and clear, but so solemn that it was almost unearthly;
and it seemed in some strange way to mingle with the purity of the cold
dawn that comes when all the passions of the world are still, but which
makes the leaves tremble at the crime and trouble of another day.

when the prior stood up, the brothers left to begin their manual labour,
each one in his allotted place. the fathers remained in their stalls until
after the four o'clock mass, and then they, too, fell to work until six
o'clock--the hour of prime. i soon followed the brothers, although not so
far as the fields, the cheese-rooms, and farm-buildings. i returned to my
room; but as i had to pass on the upper side of the screen on leaving the
church, i looked at the two rows of white figures standing in their stalls.
it may have been the effect of the mingled daylight and lamplight: whatever
the reason, i thought during those few seconds that i had never before seen
such a collection of strange and startling faces. they were those of sombre
men who had walked through hell like dante, and who bore upon their calm
and corpse-like features the deep-cut traces of the flame and horror.

i took up my old place by the window, and watched in the twilight of
morning an aged brother, with frock hitched up above his naked ankles and
his feet in great _sabots_, fetch sack after sack of what i supposed to be
bran, and carry it away on his shoulders. he passed close to me, and looked
at me with an expression which i interpreted to mean: 'you must be a
lunatic to stare at me instead of going to bed--you, who have monseigneur's
soft bed, and are at liberty to sleep.' but no word passed between us. at
length i did go to bed again, and slept.

i was awakened by a noise in my room, and on opening my eyes i saw a long
figure in white two or three yards from me, and i realized that a trappist
father was watching me. then, when he perceived that i was awake, he glided
from the room without saying a word. had i spoken, he would have replied,
and explained what he wanted; but i had not recovered sufficiently from my
surprise to remember the rule until he was gone. i now called to mind that
the postulant had told me over-night that a certain father would show me
round the monastery after prime. this, then, was he, and i was doubtless
keeping him waiting, for it was seven o'clock. a few minutes later he
returned. i was then at my ablutions.

now, although i have grown pretty well accustomed to go through this daily
duty with the aid of salad-bowls and slop-basins while living in the french
provinces, i think it good for the mind to keep up the illusion of a
thorough wash even when this is practically impossible. when, therefore,
the trappist stalked again into my room without giving me warning, his
costume, simple as it was, was surpassed by the simplicity of mine. i told
him that i would be with him in two or three minutes, and he retired with
a slow and stately nod. i tried very hard to keep my word, for i expected
every moment to see the door open again. when i opened it myself, i found
the father pacing slowly in the passage. knowing that there is not much to
be had in a trappist monastery without asking, i opened the conversation
by making some delicate allusions to breakfast. the truth is that the
bread-and-cheese supper was nothing to me now but an unsatisfactory
recollection, and, with the sense of vacuum that distressed me, i was
unwilling to follow the monk upon the promised round, lest i should die of
inanition on the way. he asked me what i would like to eat, and i said,
'anything that is near at hand.' had i suggested that a chop or a steak
would be suitable after so light a dinner, i should not have had it; but i
might have received a large measure of silent reprobation for my bad taste
in asking for it, and also for having reminded a trappist of such vanities
of the past.

the father--he was becoming fatherly indeed--went to a cupboard of the
_salle a manger_ already described, and brought out what i had left of the
bread and cheese set before me the previous evening. having placed this
on the table, with a bottle of beer--the postulant had led me to hope
for coffee and milk, but there was evidently no escape from malt liquor
here--he withdrew to a little office close by where he was wont to perform
the daily duty of keeping the cheese accounts of the monastery. i felt sure
that when he had reckoned up a few figures he would be coming round to
tear me away from the bread and cheese, so i endeavoured to hasten the
consumption with as much speed as i could decently put on. i was right in
my conjecture. i had not been seated five minutes, when he came back and
wandered half round the table.

'_j'aurai fini dans un petit moment, mon pere,_' said i, as i cut off
another piece of cheese. by-the-bye, nobody should call a trappist
'_monsieur_,' because the monk has ceased to have even a name of his
own other than his religious one, and has become a father or brother to
everybody. he returned to his accounts; but he had not gone very deeply
into them when he saw me standing at the door of his little den. he left
his books at once, and we walked side by side where he chose to lead me. he
was a rather tall man, with a face that was an enigma. the features were
so like those of the late mr. charles bradlaugh, that if the english
freethinker had disappeared mysteriously i might have strongly suspected
him of having turned trappist.

this father volunteered no information whatever; it had all to be drawn out
of him. he spoke in a low voice, and, as it appeared to me, with something
of the hesitation of a man who is recalling his mother tongue after many
years of disuse. his face was large and heavy; but there was a keen light
in his eyes which at times was that of gaiety well kept under. he soon let
me see that even a trappist may give out an occasional flash of humour.
i was questioning him respecting the help that the monastery gave to the
poor, and he told me that in addition to thirty or forty persons living
in the locality who received regular assistance every day, about the same
number of wanderers stopped at the gate and waited for the bread and cheese
which was never refused them.

'men looking for work?' i asked innocently.

'yes,' replied the monk, without moving a muscle of his stolid face; 'and
who pray to god that he will not give them any.'

it was evident that no sentimental illusions respecting the begging class
were entertained by the community. the monk confirmed what people in the
country had already told me of the help afforded by the trappists to
peasant agriculturists in difficulties. the sick were, moreover, supplied
with medicines gratuitously from the small pharmacy attached to the
monastery. i did not ask the question, but i concluded that at least one of
the fathers had a medical diploma. the medicine that was chiefly wanted in
the double when the trappists settled there was quinine. the demand upon it
was very heavy years ago, but by removing to a great extent the cause of
the fever-breeding miasma, the monks have been able to economize the drug.

talking about these matters, we reached the refectory. a great cold room
with whitewashed walls, and five long narrow tables with benches on each
side, stretching from end to end, was the place where the monks took their
very frugal meals. the tables were laid for the first meal. there were
no cloths, and it is almost needless to add that there were no napkins,
although these are considered so essential in france that even in the most
wretched auberge one is usually laid before the guest. trappists, however,
have little need of them. at each place were a wooden spoon and fork, a
plate, a jug of water, and another jug--a smaller one--of beer, and a
porringer for soup, which is the chief of the trappists' diet. very thin
soup it is, the ingredients being water, chopped vegetables, bread, and
a little oil or butter. until a few years ago no oily matter, whether
vegetable or animal, was allowed in the soup, nor was it permissible,
except in case of sickness, to have more than one meal a day; but the
necessity of relaxing the rule a little was realized. now, during the six
summer months of the year, there are two meals a day, namely, at eleven and
six; but in winter there is still only one that is called a meal, and this
is at four. there is, however, a _gouter_--just something to keep the
stomach from collapsing--at ten in the morning. no flesh, nor fish, nor
animal product, except cheese and butter, is eaten by these trappists
unless they fall ill, and then they have meat or anything else that they
may need to make them well. there is, however, very little sickness amongst
them. the living of each trappist probably costs no more than sixpence a
day to the community. assuming that the money brought into the common fund
by those who have a private fortune--the fathers, as a rule, are men of
some independent means--covers the establishment expenses and the taxation
imposed by the state, there must remain a considerable profit on the work
of each individual, whether he labours in the fields or in the dairy and
cheese rooms, or concerns himself with the sales and the accounts, or, like
the porter at the gate, tests with an instrument the richness of the milk
that is brought in by the peasants, lest they who have been befriended
by the monks in sickness and penury should steal from them in return. to
devote this surplus, obtained by a life of sacrifice compared to which
the material misery of the beggars whom they relieve is luxury, to the
lessening of human suffering, to the encouragement of the family, offering
the hand of charity to the worthy and to the unworthy--expecting no honour
from all this, not even gratitude--is a life that makes that of the
theoretical philanthropists and humanitarian philosophers look rather
barren. let every man who lives up to an unselfish ideal have full credit
for it, whether he be a trappist or a buddhist.

at one end of the refectory, below the line of tables, was a small wooden
bench for a single person. the monk pointed to it with half a smile upon
his face.

'what is it?' i asked.

'the stool of penitence,' he replied.

here the monk who had brought upon himself some disciplinary correction sat
by order of the abbot in view of everybody, and had the extra mortification
of watching the others eat, while he, the penitent, had nothing to put
between his teeth. i wondered if my cicerone had ever been perched there,
but i was not on such terms of familiarity with him that i could ask the
question.

from the refectory we went to the dormitory, an oblong room with a passage
down the middle, and cells on each side--about fifty altogether. they
were very narrow, and were separated by lath and plaster partitions, only
carried to the height of about six feet. these partitions, which had been
whitewashed over, looked very fragile and dilapidated, and altogether the
appearance of this great dormitory was wretched in the extreme. a glance
into the interior of two or three of the cells deepened this impression. in
each was a small wooden bedstead about a foot and a half high, with nothing
upon it but a very thin paillasse, a black blanket (the colour of the
wool), and a little bolster. upon a nail hung a small cat-o'-nine-tails of
knotted whipcord.

'how often do you administer to yourselves the discipline?' i asked.

'every friday,' said the monk.

to other questions that i put to him he replied that about ten members
of the community were priests, and that fathers and brothers used the
dormitory in common. there was no distinction between the two classes as
regards the vows that were taken.

we passed into the cloisters, which were very plain, without any attempt
at architectural ornament; but the garden that filled the centre of the
quadrangle was carefully kept, and the many flowers there were evidently
watered and otherwise tended by hands that were gentle to them. then i
asked if it was true that the members of the community, when they passed
one another in their ordinary occupations, were allowed to break the rule
of silence only to say, 'remember death!'

'no,' replied the monk, 'it is a legend that originated with
chateaubriand.'

we reached the chapter-house, a plain room with benches along the walls and
a case containing a small collection of books. i saw nothing of interest
here excepting a genealogical tree of the order of reformed cistercians,
called trappists, showing its descent from the abbey of citeaux, and a
portrait of pere dom sebastien, abbot-general of the trappists, who was a
pontifical zouave before he put on the monastic habit.

i asked to see the cemetery, and was led to an uncultivated spot a little
beyond the block of convent buildings. a small grassy enclosure, with a
wooden paling round it, was the monks' burying-place. about twelve had died
in the twenty-five years of the monastery's existence, but most of the
graves looked recent. this was explained to me by the father, who actually
smiled as he said:

'we who came here at the commencement are getting old now, and are
following one another to the cemetery rather quickly.'

wearers of the white frock and wearers of the brown frock were lying in
perfect equality side by side as they happened to die, each having a
small cross of white wood standing in the grass of his grave. i read: 'n.
raphael, monachus----, natus----, professus----, obiit----.' the dates
i took no note of. with the exception of the name and the dates, the
inscription on each cross was the same. and the name, it need scarcely be
said, was the one taken in religion.

'do you know one another's family names?' i asked of the living monk by my
side, who appeared to have lapsed into meditation, thinking, perhaps, how
far his place would be from the last on the line.

'as a rule we do not. there are only two or three monks here whose names i
know.'

lastly, i was taken to the farm buildings, where there were about fifty
cows and one hundred pigs. a young brother, a novice, was busy, with his
frock hitched up, cleaning out the pigsties. he was piously plying the
shovel, but his face had not yet acquired an expression of perfect
resignation. he was young, however, and perhaps he had been brought up in
better society than that of pigs.

i was invited with much kindness and courtesy to stay until after the
eleven o'clock meal; but, grateful as i felt to the trappists for their
bread and cheese and home-brewed beer, which had enabled me to sustain life
for more than twelve hours, i was quite content with what i had received in
that way. my curiosity being also satisfied, i gladly went forth into the
wicked world again after exchanging a cordial farewell with the genial
porter, who, when he caught sight of me returning to his lodge, looked
sharply to see if the jar of beer was safe, and his mind being made easy on
the point, he begged me to let him pour me out a glass. then he gazed at me
with round eyes of surprise and reproach when i declined the offer.

it was only a little past eight when i left the monastery. 'ah,' i thought,
as i felt the gentle glow of the early sunshine and breathed the fresh air
of the wide world, 'there is time enough for me to become a trappist.'

i continued on the road to montpont. it was a sad and silent land over
which i passed, with frequent crosses by the wayside, telling of the
influence of the monks. the words, '_o crux, ave!_' met me amidst the
heather and on the margin of lonely pools. i was now in the most forlorn
part of the double, where all around the eye rested upon forest, swamp, and
moor. not that i found it dismal: i drew delight from the lonesomeness,
and revelled in the wildness of all things. sunshine and flowers made the
desert beautiful. the waysides were red with thyme or purple with heather,
and the blooming lysimachia was like a belt of gold around the reedy pools.
after walking some miles over this country, patches of maize, potatoes, and
vines told me i was nearing a village. at length i came to one, and it
was called st. barthelemy. it was on the top of a bare chalky hill, and
commanded an extensive view of the wasteful double. it had a windblown,
naked appearance, like many villages near the sea, although the ocean was
still far from here. moreover, there was a strange quietude--the stillness
of a fever-stricken spot. the men and women looked undersized and
prematurely old, and the children were pale and thin. although the village
was on a hill, the evil influence of the marshes reached it. i was told,
however, that it had become much less unhealthy of late years. on the
highest spot was a poor and plain little church, with a paddock-like
cemetery on one side of it.

although the hour was still early, i stopped for a meal at st. barthelemy,
for it seemed to me that i had been fasting a day or more. choosing the
only inn that looked promising, i sat down in a large room, where there
were two long tables and a bed in one corner. the shutters of the windows
were carefully closed to keep out the flies, and all the light that entered
came through the chinks and cracks. in the south, people prefer to eat in
semi-darkness rather than be tormented by flies. the only other person in
the house was a young woman, and she was very uncouth. she may have held
me in suspicion, for not a word would she say beyond what was rigorously
necessary; but, as she cooked much better than i had expected, i thought no
ill of her. she gave me, after an _omelette au cerfeuil_, a _fricassee_ of
chicken, with very fair wine of the district, red and white. dessert and
coffee followed, and the charge was not much over a shilling.

as i left the village, i noticed upon a low building these words in large
letters, '_depot de sangsues_,' and concluded that catching leeches in the
pools about here was a local industry. on inquiring, however, i was told
that such was not the case, but that a man here had had a quantity of
leeches sent from bordeaux to supply the district.

'but what is the meaning of this great liking for leeches?' i asked.

'well,' replied my informant, 'i should tell you that the people about here
always used to be bled when they had anything the matter with them. but the
doctors will do it no longer, consequently we do it ourselves.'

the sad-looking peasants, with pale dark faces, whom i saw reaping their
meagre wheat on the outskirts of the village, seemed, like many more i had
met since i left riberac, to be in much greater need of blood than leeches.
women, wearing straw-bonnets of the coal-scuttle shape, were reaping with
men in the noonday heat. upon all the burden of life appeared to press very
heavily. the chalky soil produced miserable crops of wheat, maize,
and potatoes that yielded no just return for the labour expended. the
luxuriance of the young vines, planted where the old ones had perished
from the phylloxera, showed that the hillsides here are better suited for
wine-growing than for anything else.

as i went on, the country became more sombre from the increasing number of
pines bordering the road and mingling with the distant forest. very weird
pines these were, chiefly covered with closely-packed dead foliage, with
a living tuft of dark green at the end of each branchlet. a living death
seemed to be their lot, and they moaned without moving as the light wind
passed on its way.

but the descent towards the valley of the isle had now begun. huts built of
brick and mud and wood became frequent, with hedges of quince bordering the
gardens or little fields. quite unexpectedly the river shone beneath me,
and by following its course downward i soon came to a large block of
scarcely connected buildings with high mansard roofs. this was a monastery
of the carthusians. i did not recognise it at once as the conventual
establishment well known in the district as the chartreuse de vauclaire,
nor did i show any better understanding as regards a certain human form
hoeing in a field beside the road with back towards me.

wishing for information, i hailed this fellow-being as 'madame!' the figure
straightened itself immediately and turned towards me a head covered with
a broad-brimmed straw hat, such as women wear in the fields; but the face
ended in a long, grizzly beard. then i noticed that what i had taken for a
brown stuff dress was a monk's frock.

it was a carthusian brother whom i had addressed as 'madame!' as he gave
no sign to indicate what his feelings were with regard to this mistake, i
thought it better not to make excuses, but asked him if i was on the road
to montpont learning that i was, i went on, and having reached the convent,
which i now recognised for what it was, i pulled the bell of the porter's
lodge. i was at once admitted to the presence of a tall and meagre
carthusian father, with a long, coal-black beard and very dark eyes, with a
fixed expression that expressed nothing that i could be sure about. what
i fancied that i read in them was doubtfulness as to my motives, and the
necessity of being cautious.

by far the greater number of visitors who call here ask for food. i wished
to see the monastery. after a little hesitation, this father, who before i
left him was so communicative as to tell me he was a spaniard, made a
sign to me to follow him. he showed me the church--which contains some
interesting carvings--the cloisters, and the cemetery; but every bit of
information had to be drawn from him as if it were a tooth. this was the
kind of conversation that passed between us:

'are there many monks here?'

'not a small number.'

'do you make cheese?'

'yes.'

'for sale?'

'no.'

'do you make the _liqueur?_'

'oh no.'

he would have allowed me to leave with the impression that the carthusians
of vauclaire did nothing beyond observing the canonical hours; but i learnt
from the peasants of the country that, like the trappists, they laboured
industriously in clearing and draining the desert.

my walk across the double ended at montpont, a small agricultural centre on
the banks of the isle, offering no charm to the traveller, unless he be a
commercial one. it was a little fortified town of some importance in the
middle ages. in 1370 the bretons in garrison at perigueux besieged it, and
it was surrendered without a struggle by the baron, guillaume de montpont,
an english partisan. the duke of lancaster then hurried up and besieged the
place with one hundred men-at-arms and five hundred archers. for eleven
weeks the little band of bretons held out, but a breach having been made in
the wall, montpont again fell into the power of the english.

[illustration: the dronne at coutras.]




a canoe voyage on the dronne.


before starting upon a long-thought-of voyage down the dronne, i resolved
to make the canoe look as beautiful as possible, so that it might produce a
favourable impression upon the natives of the regions through which it was
going to pass. i had learnt from experience that when one can take the
edge off suspicion by giving one's self or one's belongings a respectable
appearance, that does not cost much, it is well to do it.

therefore i sent the bare-footed helie, who always helped me when i had
any dirty work on hand, to buy some paint. having first puttied up all the
cracks and crevices, we laid the paint on, and as the colour chosen was a
very pale green, the effect was anything but vulgar. when the boat was put
on the water again it looked like a floating willow-leaf of rather uncommon
size.

now, between the river isle, where i was, and the dronne, where i wished
to be, there was an obstacle in the shape of some twelve miles of hilly
country. a light cart was accordingly hired to convey the canoe and
ourselves (i was accompanied on this adventure by an english boy named
hugh, sixteen years old, and just let loose from school) to the point at
which i had decided to commence the voyage down-stream. we left at five in
the morning, when the sun was gilding the yellow tufts and the motionless
long leaves of the maize-field. when we were fairly off--the boat, in
which we were seated, stretching many feet in the rear of the very small
cart--the most anxious member of the party was the horse, for he had never
carried such a queer load as this before, and the novelty of the sensation
caused by the weight far behind completely upset his notions of propriety.
his conduct was especially strange while going up-hill, for then he would
stop short from time to time and make an effort to look round, as if
uncertain whether it was all a hideous dream, or whether he was really
growing out behind in the form of a crocodile.

the peasants whom we met on the road stood still and gazed with eyes and
mouths wide open until we were out of sight. they had never seen people
travelling in a boat before on dry land. when they heard we were english
all was explained: '_ces diables d'anglais sont capables de tout_.'

while crossing the country in this fashion we passed a spot on the highroad
where a man was getting ready to thresh his wheat. he had prepared the
place by spreading over it a layer of cow-dung, and levelling it with his
bare feet until it was quite smooth and hard. it is in this way that the
threshing-floors are usually made.

'you see that _type?_' said the young man who was driving, and who balanced
himself on the edge of a board.

'yes.'

'well, he owns more land than any other peasant about here, and is rich,
and yet, rather than turn a bit of his ground into a threshing-floor, he
brings his corn where you see him and threshes it upon the road.'

i said to myself that this man was not the first to discover that one
way to get on is to trespass as much as possible upon the rights of that
easy-going neighbour called the public.

the hills between the two valleys were, for the most part, wooded with
natural forest, with a dense undergrowth of heather and gorse. as soon as
we began to descend towards the dronne, the great southern broom, six or
eight feet high, was seen in splendid flower upon the roadside banks. we
found the dronne at the village of tocane st. apre, and we launched the
boat below the mill about half a mile farther down-stream. then, having
put on board a knapsack containing clothes, a valise filled chiefly with
provisions, several bottles of wine, one of rum (a safer spirit in france
than some others), and another of black coffee, made very strong, so that
it should last a long time, we took our first lunch in the boat, in the
cool shade of some old alders.

the wine had been already heated by the sun during the journey, but the
means of cooling it somewhat was near at hand. we hitched a couple of
bottles to the roots of the alders, with their necks just out of the water.
the young peasant who had driven us was invited to share our meal, and the
horse was left at the mill with a good feed of oats to comfort him and help
him to forget all the horrible suspicions that the boat had caused him. the
meal was simple enough, for we had brought no luxurious fare with us;
but the feeling of freedom and new adventure, the low song of the stream
running over the gravel in the shallows, the peace and beauty of the little
cove under the alders, made it more delightful than a sumptuous one with
other surroundings.

everything went as smoothly as the deep water where the boat was chained,
until the spirit-lamp was lighted for warming the coffee. then it was
discovered that the little saucepan had been forgotten. this was trying,
for when you have grown used to coffee after lunch you do not feel happy
without it, so long as there is a chance of getting it. it is exasperating
when you have the coffee ready made, but cannot warm it for want of a small
utensil. the peasant went to the mill to borrow a saucepan, and he brought
back one that was just what we wanted; at least, we thought so until the
coffee began to run out through a hole in the bottom. in vain we tried to
stop the leak with putty, which was brought in case the boat should spring
one; but after awhile it stopped itself--quite miraculously. thus good
fortune came to our aid at the outset, and it looked like a fair omen of a
prosperous voyage.

we did not linger too long over this meal, for i had not come prepared to
pass the night either in the boat or on the grass, and i hoped to reach
riberac in the evening. the bottles were put away in the locker, and what
was not eaten was returned to the valise. then we parted company with the
young peasant, whose private opinion was that we should not go very far.
but he was mistaken; we went a long way, after encountering many serious
obstacles, as will be seen by-and-by.

the chain being pulled in, the boat glided off like the willow-leaf to
which i have already compared it. i sat on my piece of sliding board about
the middle, and hugh sat on his piece of wood--which was the top of the
locker--in the stern. we both used long double-bladed paddles. in a few
seconds we were in the current, and in a few more were aground. although
the canoe was flat-bottomed, it needed at least three inches of water to
float comfortably with us and the cargo. we were in a forest of reeds that
hid the outer world from us, and we had left the true current for another
that led us to the shallows. but this little difficulty was quickly
overcome, and i soon convinced myself that, notwithstanding the dearth of
water after the long drought, it was quite possible to descend the dronne
from st. apre in a boat such as mine.

now, as there was no wager to make me hurry, and my main purpose in giving
myself all the trouble that lay before me was to see things, i put my
paddle down, and leaving hugh to work off some of his youthful ardour for
navigation, i gave myself up for awhile to the spell of this most charming
stream. its breadth and its depth were constantly changing, and in a truly
remarkable manner. now it was scarcely wider than a brook might be, and was
nearly over-arched by its alders and willows; now it widened out and
sped in many a flashing runnel through a broad jungle of reeds where the
blistering rays of the sun beat down with tropical ardour; then it slept in
pools full of long green streamers that waved slowly like an undine's hair.
here and there all about stood the waxen flowers of sagittaria above the
barbed floating leaves, cool and darkly green. close to the banks the tall
and delicately branching water-plantains, on which great grasshoppers
often hang their shed skins, were flecked with pale-pink blooms-flowers of
biscuit-porcelain on hair-like stems.

the splashing of a water-wheel roused me from my idle humour. we had
reached--much too quickly--our first mill-dam. it was a very primitive sort
of dam, formed of stakes and planks, but chiefly of brambles, dead wood
and reeds that had floated down and lodged there. then began the tugging,
pushing, and lifting, to be continued at irregular intervals for several
days. the canoe was less than three feet wide in the middle, but it was
more than six yards long, and this length, although it secured steadiness
and greatly reduced the risk of capsizing in strong rapids or sinister
eddies, brought the weight up to about 170 lb., without reckoning the
baggage, which was turned out upon the grass or on the stones at each weir.
after passing the first obstacle, we floated into one of those long deep
pools which lend a peculiar charm to the dronne. usually covered in summer
with white or yellow lilies--seldom the two species together--these and
other plants that rejoice in the cool liquid depths show their scalloped
or feathery forms with perfect distinctness far below the surface of the
limpid water.

here, o idle water-wanderer, let your boat glide with the scarcely moving
current, and gaze upon the leafy groves of the sub-aqueous wilderness lit
up by the rays of the sun, and watch the fish moving singly or in shoals
at various depths--the bearded barbel, the spotted trout, the shimmering
bream, and the bronzen tench. watch, too, the speckled water-snakes gliding
upon the gravel or lurking like the ancient serpent in mimic gardens of
eden. mark all the varied life and wondrous beauty of nature there. above
all, do not hurry, for little is seen by those who hasten on.

at a weir of sticks and stones forming a rather wide dam, overgrown by tall
hemp-agrimony now in flower, we met with our first difficulty. there was no
overflow to help us, for in this time of drought the mill-wheel needed all
the stream to turn it; so the boat had to be lifted over the stakes and
stones. into the water we had to go, and boots and socks, being now put
aside, were not worn again for five days, except when we went ashore in the
evening, and had to make an effort to look respectable.

the dam being passed, the boat shot down a rapid current; then, as the bed
widened out and the water stilled, we were hidden from the world by reeds,
through which we had to force a way while the sun smote us and frizzled us.
countless dragonflies flashed their brilliant colours as they whirled and
darted, green frogs plunged at our approach from their diving-boards of
matted rush, or quirked defiance from the banks where they were safe; and
now and again a startled kingfisher showed us the blue gleam of a wing
above the brown maces of the bulrushes and the high-hanging tassels of the
sedges.

the bell of an unseen church a long way off sounded the mid-day angelus,
and told that we had not drifted so far as it appeared from the peopled
world. leaving the reeds, we passed again into the shade of alders that
stretched their gnarled, fantastic roots far over the babbling or dreaming
water, and thence again amongst the sunny reeds. and so the hours went by,
and there were no villages, or even houses, to be seen, but the little
rough mills beside the slowly toiling wheel, which in most cases seemed to
be the only living thing there. once, however, there was a naked child,
very brown, and as round as a spider between the hips and the waist,
playing upon a flowery bank above the mother, who wore a brilliant-coloured
kerchief on her head, and who knelt beside the water as she rinsed the
little elfs shirt. i thought the picture pretty enough to make a note of
it. this caused some contemptuous surprise to my companion in the back of
the boat--not yet alive to the innocent cunning of the artist and writer,
for he asked me, in the descriptive language of the british schoolboy:

'are you going to stick down _that?_'

on we went, turning and turning, gliding into nooks that seemed each more
charming than the other, and having a constant succession of delightful
surprises, interrupted only by the mill-dams, which were distressingly
frequent.

the hot hours stole away or passed into the mellowness of evening, and the
marsh-mallows that fringed the stream were looking coolly white when
we drew near to riberac. the water widened and deepened, and we met a
pleasure-boat, vast and gaudy, recalling some picture of queen elizabeth's
barge on the thames. under an awning sat a bevy of ladies in bright
raiment, pleasant to look at, and in front of them were several young men
valiantly rowing, or, rather, digging their short sculls into the water,
as if they were trying to knock the brains out of some fluvial monsters
endeavouring to capture the youth and loveliness under the awning.

having reached that part of the river which was nearest riberac, i had to
find a place where the boat could be left, and where it would be safe from
the enterprise of boys--a bad invention in all countries. it is just,
however, to the french boy to say that he is not quite so fiendish out of
doors as the english one; but he makes things even by his conduct at home,
where he conscientiously devotes his animal spirits to the destruction of
his too-indulgent parents.

my difficulty was solved by a kind butcher, whose garden ran down to the
water. he let me chain the boat to one of his trees, and he took our fowl,
which was intended for lunch next day, and put it into his meat-safe--an
excellent service, for the drainage of his slaughter-house, emptying into
the river by the side of the boat, was enough to make even a live fowl lose
its freshness in a single night. we were soon settled in a comfortable inn
that prided itself, not without reason, upon its _cuisine_. here we had a
_friture_ of gudgeons from the dronne, which is famous throughout a wide
region for the quality of these and other fish.

the next morning i bought a saucepan, a melon, and grapes--which were
already ripe, although the date was the 9th august. thus laden, we returned
to the boat and to the kindly butcher, who gave us our fowl wrapped up, not
in a newspaper as we had left it, but in a sheet of spotless white paper.
having refilled our bottles, some with water, others with wine, we parted
from our hospitable acquaintance with pleasant words, and were afloat again
before the hour of eight. we had a serious wetting at the first weir, but
were dry again before we stopped to lunch. this time we landed, and chose
our spot in a beautiful little meadow, where an alder cast its shade upon
the bank. it was far from all habitations, but had the case been otherwise,
there would have been no danger of our being disturbed by a voice from
behind saying: 'you have no right to land here,' or, 'you are trespassing
in this field.'

now, this little meadow was, except where the river ran by it, enclosed by
a high hedge, just as one in england might be, and although it was some
four hundred miles south of paris, and the season had been exceptionally
dry, the grass was brightly green. just below us was the clear river,
fringed with sedges, sprinkled all over with yellow lilies; beyond this
were other meadows, and then rose towards the cloudless sky the line of
wooded hills. there was a great quietude that nothing broke, save the
splash of a rising fish and the chorus of grasshoppers in the sunny
herbage. here we stayed a good hour and warmed our coffee tranquilly in the
new saucepan, which afterwards proved very useful for baling purposes. then
i smoked the pipe of peace, and felt tempted to tarry in this pleasant
place; but hugh roused me to action by talking of fishing.

a few minutes later we were again on our voyage. not far below was another
mill-dam of sticks and stones, and when this was passed the river widened
so that it flowed round a little island covered with alders and purple
loosestrife, and girt by a broad belt of white water-lilies. at the next
weir, which was troublesome, we were helped by the miller and his brother,
while a pretty young woman of about twenty, who stood with bare feet, short
skirt, uncovered stays, open chemise, and a linen sun-bonnet of the pattern
known in england, looked on with a fat baby in her arms. these helpful
people refilled our water-bottles, and watched us with interest until we
were out of sight.

reeds again--innumerable reeds--through which we had to drag the canoe, for
we had somehow lost the current. arrow-head and prickly bur-reed, great
rushes and sedges--a joy to the marsh botanist by the variety of their
species--stood against us in serried phalanxes, saying: 'union is strength;
we are weak when alone, but altogether we will give you some work that you
will remember.' and they did so before we left them behind. now, above the
lily-spotted water, deep and clear, showed a little cluster of houses on a
low cliff, and below these, close to the river, an old pigeon-house with
pointed roof.

to finish the picture, a narrow wooden bridge supported by poles stretching
downward at all angles, like the legs of an ungainly insect, had been
thrown across the stream. and here a great flock of geese, horrified at so
unwonted an apparition as the pale green boat and the paddles in fantastic
movement, were holding a hasty council of war, which we broke up before
they came to a decision.

the flow of water in the river had been perceptibly increased by
tributaries, and now, after each mill, the current was strong enough to
take us down for a mile or two at a quick rate. the little boat danced
gaily in the rapids. the great heat of the day had gone, and the light was
waning, when we mistook an arm of the river for the main stream, and found
ourselves at length in a little gully, very dim with overarching foliage,
and where the sound of rushing water grew momentarily louder.

it was all one to hugh whether he got turned out or not, but i had lived
long enough not to like the vision of a roll in the stream at the end of
the day, with baggage swamped, if not lost. therefore i chained up the
boat, and went to examine the rapids. i found the stream in great turmoil,
where it rushed over hidden rocks, and in the centre was a wave about three
feet high, that rose like a curve of clear green glass, but turned white
with anger, and broke into furious foam, as it fell into the basin below.
having ascertained that the rock was sufficiently under water, i decided
that we would take our chance in the current after turning out the baggage.

we kept right in the centre. it was an exciting moment as we touched the
wave. the canoe made a bound upwards, then plunged into the boiling torrent
below. a moment more and we were out of all risk. so swift was the passage
that scarcely a gallon of water was taken in. having put the baggage back,
we continued our voyage towards the unknown, for i knew not whither this
stream was going to take us. about a mile or two farther down, however, it
joined the river, which here seemed very wide. it was marvellous to find
that the brook of yesterday had grown to this; a circumstance to be
explained, however, by the number of springs that rise in its bed.

the scene was beyond all description beautiful. the wooded banks, the calm
water, the islands of reeds and sedges, the pure white lilies that scented
the air and murmured softly as the boat brushed their snowy petals, were
all stained with the blood of the dying sun. for a moment i saw the upper
rim of the red disc between the trunks of two trees far away that seemed to
grow taller and more sombre; then came the twilight with its purple tones.

the colours faded, darkness crept over the valley, and the water, losing
its transparency, looked unfathomably deep, and mirrored with tenfold power
all the fantastic gloom of the leaning alders, and the weird forms of the
hoary willows. and there was no light or sound from any town or village,
nor even from a lonely cottage. i had expected to reach at sundown the
little town of aubeterre, in the department of the charente, but all ideas
of distance based upon a map are absurdly within the mark when one follows
the course of a winding river, and the information of the inhabitants is
equally misleading, for they always calculate distances by the road.

when we reached the next weir there was very little light left, so, without
attempting to pass it, we paddled down to the mill. it was kept by three
brothers, who treated us with much kindness and attention. i learnt that we
were not far from the village of nabinaud in the charente, where there was
a small inn at which it would be possible to pass the night.

aubeterre was still some miles off by water, and there were weirs to
overcome. tired out, with legs and feet scraped and scratched by stones and
stumps, and smarting still more from sun-scorch, we were glad enough to
find a sufficient reason for getting out of the boat here.

one of the brothers carried politeness so far--i saw from the importance
of the mill that remuneration was not to be thought of--as to walk about a
mile uphill in order to show the inn and to see us settled in it. then he
left, for i could not prevail upon him to sit down and chink glasses.
it was but a cottage-inn on the open hillside, and i doubt if the
simple-minded people who kept it would have accepted us for the night but
for the introduction. husband and wife gave up their room to us, and where
they went themselves i could not guess, unless it was to the loft or
fowl-house. they were surprised, almost overcome, by the invasion, the
like of which had never happened to them before; but they showed plenty of
goodwill.

all that could be produced in the way of dinner was an omelet, some fried
ham, very fat and salt, and some _grillons_-a name given to the residue
that is left by pork-fat when it has been slowly boiled down to make lard.
the people of guyenne think much of their _grillons_ or _fritons_. i
remember a jovial-faced innkeeper of the south telling me that he and
several members of his family went to paris in a party to see the
exhibition of 1889, and that they took with them _grillons_ enough to keep
them going for a week, with the help of bread and wine, which they were
compelled to buy of the parisians, had they done all that their provincial
ideas of prudence dictated, they would have taken with them everything that
was necessary to the sustenance of the body during their absence from home.

the best part of our meal must not be forgotten; it was salad,
fresh-plucked from the little garden enclosed by a paling, well mixed with
nut-oil, wine-vinegar, and salt. then for dessert there was abundance of
grapes and peaches.

the little room in which we slept, or, to speak more correctly, where i
tried to sleep, had no ornament except the sunday clothes of the innkeeper
and his wife hanging against the walls. next to it was the pigsty, as the
inmates took care to let me know by their grunting. had i wished to escape
in the night without paying the bill, nothing would have been easier, for
the window looked upon a field that was about two feet below the sill.

i opened this window wide to feel the cool air, and long after hugh went to
sleep, with the willingness of his sixteen years, i sat listening to the
crickets and watching the quiet fields and sky, which were lit up every few
seconds by the lightning flash of an approaching storm--still too far away,
however, to blur even with a cloudy line the tranquil brilliancy of the
stars.

leaving the window open, i lay down upon the outer edge of the bed, but to
no purpose. in the first place, i am never happy on the edge of a narrow
bed, and then sleep and i were on bad terms that night. the lightning,
growing stronger, showed my host's best trousers hanging against the
whitewashed wall, and from the pigsty came indignant snorts in answer to
the deepening moan of the thunder; but the crickets of the house sang after
their fashion of the hearth and home, and those outside of the great joy of
idleness in the summer fields. from a bit of hedge or old wall came now and
then the clear note of a fairy-bell rung by a goblin toad.

i lit the candle again, and elfish moths, with specks of burning charcoal
for eyes, dashed at me or whirled and spun about the flame. one was a most
delicately-beautiful small creature, with long white wings stained with
pink. thus i spent the night, looking at the sights and listening to the
sounds of nature; which is better than to lie with closed eyes quarrelling
with one's own brain.

we left with a boy carrying a basket of grapes and peaches, also wine to
refill the empty bottles in the boat. on my way down the hill, i stopped
at the ruin of a mediaeval castle that belonged to poltrot de mere, the
assassin of the due de guise. all this country of the angoumois, even
more than perigord, is full of the history of the religious wars of the
sixteenth century. the whole of the southwestern region of france might be
termed the classic ground of atrocities committed in the name of religion.
simon de montfort's crusaders and the albigenses, after them the huguenots
and the leaguers, have so thickly sown this land with the seed of blood,
to bear witness through all time to their merciless savagery, that the
unprejudiced mind, looking here for traces of a grand struggle of ideals,
will find little or nothing but the records of revolting brutality.

there is nothing left of poltrot de mere's stronghold but a few fragments
of wall much overgrown with ivy and brambles. in order to get a close view
of these i had to ask permission of the owner of the land--an elderly man,
who looked at me with a troubled eye, and while he wished to be polite,
considered it his duty to question me concerning my 'quality' and motives.
i knew what was in his mind: a foreigner, a spy perchance, was going about
the country, taking notes of fortified places.

it was true that this fortress, nearly hidden by vegetation, was no longer
in a state to withstand a long siege, but who could tell what importance
it might have in the eyes of a foreign power traditionally credited with
a large appetite for other people's property? however, he was not an
ill-natured man, and when i had talked to him a bit, he moved his hand
towards the ruin with quite a noble gesture, and told me that i was free to
do there anything i liked. had i been a snake-catcher, i might have done a
good deal there.

we were afloat again before the sun had begun to warm an apple's ruddy
cheek; but already the white lips of the water-lilies were wide-parted,
as the boat slid past or through their colonies upon the reedy river. we
glided under brambled banks, overtrailed with the wild vine; then the
current took us round and about many an islet of reeds and rushes where the
common _phragmites_ stood ten or twelve feet high; and now by other banks
all tangled with willow-herb, marsh-mallow, and loose-strife. over the
clear water, and the wildernesses of reeds and flowers, lay the mild
splendour of the morning sunshine. but the blissful minutes passed too
quickly; all the tones brightened to brilliancy, and by ten o'clock the
rays were striking down again with torrid ardour.

we had lunched amongst the reeds under a clump of alders, and were paddling
on again, when the massive walls and tower of a vast fortress of old time
appeared upon the top of a steep hill, rising above all other hills that
were visible, and at the foot of the castle rock were many red roofs of
houses that seemed to be nestled pleasantly in a spacious grove of trees.
above all was the dazzling blue of the sky. a truly southern picture,
flaming with shadeless colour, and glittering with intense whiteness. we
were reaching aubeterre.

we beached the canoe beside a meadow, opposite a spot where about twenty
women were washing clothes, their noses very near the water. they were
mightily surprised to see us suddenly arrive in our swift boat. all the
heads came up together, and the rest went down.

we walked into a riverside inn, and there i made friends with the innkeeper
over one or two bottles of beer--there was an innocent liquor so called on
sale at aubeterre. the _aubergiste_ was rather down on his luck, for some
mill at which he had been employed had gone wrong financially, and the
wheels thought it no longer worth while to turn round. he therefore
undertook to show us the way to everything that ought to be seen at
aubeterre.

he led us up a steep winding road where the sun smote furiously, where
there was no shade, and where the dust was so hot that it might have
roasted an egg, if the person waiting for it was in no great hurry. we had
gone a very little way, when hugh proposed to return and mount guard over
the boat, for whose safety he had become unreasonably anxious. on reaching
the steep little town there was more shade, because the streets were
narrow, but the rough pitching of cobble-stones was very bad for feet so
sore as ours, and so swollen that the boots into which we managed to force
them before leaving the river were now several sizes too small.

we stopped at the parish church, but not so long as i should have, had i
been a lonely wayfarer without anybody to guide me. it is a delightful
example of a romanesque style that is found much repeated in perigord,
angoumois, and the bordelais. the great interest lies in the facade, which
dates from the eleventh century. here we have a large central portal, and
on each side of it, what the architectural design supposes to be a smaller
one, but which in reality is only a sham doorway. the slender columns
of the jambs, and the archivolts filled in with little figures, sacred,
fantastic, and grotesque, are there, as in connection with the central
arch; but all this has only an ornamental purpose. the spectator who is
at all interested in ecclesiastical architecture will examine with much
delight the elaborate mouldings and the strangely-suggestive forms of
men, beasts, birds, shapes fantastic and chimerical, which ornament these
romanesque doorways.

but this church has not the interest of singularity which belongs to
another at aubeterre--that of st. john. it is, or was, truly a church, and
yet it is not an edifice. like one at st. emilion, it is monolithic in the
sense that those who made it worked upon the solid rock with pick, hammer,
and chisel; in which way they quarried out a great nave with a rough apse
terminating in the very bowels of the hill. on one side of the nave, enough
has been left of the rock to form four immense polygonal piers, whose upper
part is lost to sight in the gloom, until the eye grows somewhat reconciled
to the glimmer of day, which, stealing in through openings in the cliff,
is drowned in darkness before it reaches the hollow of the apse. on the
opposite side is a high gallery cut in the rock in imitation of the
triforium gallery. the row of piers separates the church proper from what
was for centuries the cemetery of aubeterre: a vast burrow made by the
living for the reception of the dead, where they were plunged out of the
sunlight teeming with earthly illusion and phantasy, to await the breaking
of the great dawn.

not a spring violet nor a gaudy flower of summer gave to the air the
perfume, or to the earth the colour of sweet life, to soothe and lighten
the dreariness of the dead: such thoughts in the middle ages would have
been almost pagan. then the darkness of death was like the darkness of
night here in this necropolis hewn in the side of the ancient rock, whose
very substance is made up chiefly of other and older forms of life.
moreover, the hope that was then so firmly fixed beyond the grave was the
hope of rest--everlasting repose--after so much tossing and battling upon
the sea of life. the palmer dying of weariness by the wayside, and the
crusader of his wounds upon the blood-soaked sand, could imagine no more
blessed reward from the '_dols sire jhesu_' for all their sacrifice of
sleep, and other pain endured for their souls' sake, than a 'bed in
paradise.' to me it seemed that had i lived seven centuries ago, i should,
when dying, have been so weak as to beg my friends not to lay my body in
the awful gloom of this sepulchral cavern, there to remain until the end of
time. but the mediaeval mind, having better faith, appeared to be moved by
no such solicitude for the lifeless body.

if there are ghostly people who haunt the earth, and have their
meeting-places for unholy revel, what a playground this must be for them at
the witching hour! it is enough to make one's hair stand on end to think of
what may go on there when the sinking moon looks haggard, and the owls
hoot from the abandoned halls open to the sky of the great ruin above. the
burying went on within the rock until thirty years ago, and the skulls that
grin there in the light of the visitor's candle, and all the other bones
that have been dug up and thrown in heaps, would fill several waggons. it
was with no regret that i went out into the hot and brilliant air, and
left for ever these gloomy vaults, with their dismal human relics and that
penetrating odour of the earth that once moved and spoke, which dwells in
every ancient charnel-house.

now we climbed to the top of the calcareous and chalky hill and made the
round of the castle wall. we could not enter, because by ill-luck the owner
had gone away, and had not left the keys with anybody. this was especially
disappointing to me, because my imagination had been worked upon by
the stories i had heard of the subterranean passages leading from this
fifteenth-century stronghold far under the hill, and which had not been
thoroughly explored since the castle was abandoned. the innkeeper assured
me that during an exploration that was being made in one of them the
candles went out, and that nobody had attempted again to reach the end of
the mysterious gallery.

i may observe here that people in this part of france have such a strong
horror of passages underground, which they commonly believe to be inhabited
by snakes and toads--an abomination to them--that it is just possible
the candles of which the _aubergiste_ spoke may have been put out by the
superior brilliancy of the meridional imagination.

the time spent in this interesting little town that lies quite off all
beaten tracks made the prospect of arriving that night at st. aulaye, the
next place by the river, look rather doubtful. we re-started, however, with
the knowledge that we had still several hours of daylight before us. the
voyage now became more exciting, and likewise more fatiguing. mills were
numerous, and the weirs changed completely in character. the simple dam of
sticks and stones, with a drop of only two or three feet on the lower side,
disappeared, and in its place we had a high well-built weir, with a fall of
eight or ten feet. fortunately, there was generally enough water running
over to help us, and not enough to threaten shipwreck. the manoeuvre,
however, had to be quite altered. the boat had to be thrust or drawn
forward until it hung several feet over the edge of the weir, then a quick
push sent it down stern first into the water, while i held the chain, which
was fastened to the other end. then hugh, saucepan in hand, let himself
down by the chain, sometimes in a cascade, and baled out the water taken
in. finally, when all the traps had been collected from the dry places
where they had been laid and were handed down, i had to get into the boat
and bring the chain with me. it was a movement that had to be learnt before
it could be done gracefully and surely, and at the second weir of this
kind, where there was a considerable rush of water, in stepping on board i
lost my balance, and rolled into the river. it was, however, not the first
bath that i had received in my clothes since starting upon this expedition,
and the inconvenience of being wet to the skin was now one that troubled
neither of us much. we were dry again in two hours, if no similar
misadventure happened in the meantime.

it was an afternoon full of misfortune. we lost the spirit-lamp and
the best dinner knife, and, what was far more precious to me, the most
companionable of sticks--one that had walked with me hundreds of miles.
it was once a young oak growing upon the stony _causse_. a friendly baker
hardened it over the embers of his oven, and a cunning blacksmith put
a beautiful spike at one end of it, which became the terror of dogs
throughout guyenne.

evening stole quietly upon us with a stormy yellow glow; then little clouds
turned crimson overhead. onward went the boat through the reeds in the rosy
light, onward over the purpling water. it was nearly night when we caught
sight of the houses of st. aulaye upon a hill.

presently the wailing of water was heard, by which we knew that another
weir was near. instead of trying to pass it, we went on down the
mill-stream, my intention being to leave the canoe with the miller and walk
to the town.

now the gentle miller, after accepting the custody of the boat, held a
rapid consultation with his wife on the threshold of his dwelling, and as
we were moving off to look for a hostelry, he limped up to me--he had a leg
that seemed as stiff as a post--and said:

'if _ces messieurs_ would like to stop here to-night, we will do our best
for them. we have little to offer, for we do not keep an inn, and are only
simple people; but _ces messieurs_ are tired perhaps, and would rather stay
near their boat.'

although it was dark, i quite realized what a disreputable figure i made,
with my bare red feet, muddy flannels, and my straw hat, which, after
taking many baths and being dried as often by the sun, had come to have the
shape of almost everything but a hat. i had, therefore, grave doubts of
my ability to inspire any respectable innkeeper with confidence, and i
resolved at once to accept the offer that had been so unexpectedly made.

the spot where we were to pass the night was decidedly sombre, for there
were trees around that cast a dark shadow, and there was the incessant cry
of unseen, troubled water; but from the open door of the low house that
adjoined the mill there flashed a warm light, and, as we entered, there was
the sight, which is ever grateful to the tired wanderer, of freshly-piled
sticks blazing upon the hearth. the room was large, and the flickering
oil-lamp would have left it mostly in shadow had it not been helped by the
flame of the fire. the walls were dark from smoke and long usage, for this
was a very old mill. there was no sign of plenty, save the chunks of fat
bacon which hung from the grimy rafters. there were several children, and
one of them, almost a young woman, went out with a basket to buy us some
meat. we had not a very choice meal, but it was a solid one. it commenced
with a big tureen of country soup, made of all things, but chiefly of
bread, and which hugh, with his ideas newly-shaped in english moulds,
described as 'stodgey.' then came an omelet, a piece of veal, and a dish
of gudgeons. i am sorry to add that these most amusing little bearded fish
were dropped all alive into the boiling nut-oil.

although our bedroom was immediately overhead, we had to pass through the
mill to reach it, and the journey was a roundabout one. the lame miller was
our guide, and on our way we learnt the cause of his lameness. about a year
before he had been caught up by some of his machinery and mangled in a
frightful manner. we came to a brick wall plastered over, and a little
below a shaft that ran through it was a ragged hole nearly three feet in
diameter.

said the miller: 'you see that hole?'

'yes.'

'you wouldn't think a man's body could make that? mine did: and all those
dark splashes on the plaster are the marks of my blood!'

the poor fellow had been brought within a hair's-breadth of death, and the
long months during which he could do nothing but lie down or sit in a heap
after his accident had, he said, nearly ruined him.

this night, although we had but one room, we had two beds. i lingered at
the open window, and watched the swiftly-running mill-stream a few feet
below. it had an evil sound. then i felt the bad power that lies in water;
above all, its treachery. had not this small stream, by lending its
strength to a wheel that turned other wheels, taken up a man as if he
were a feather, and dashed him through a wall? when the morning light and
sunshine returned, the chant of the running water was as soothing as the
song of birds.

we contrived, after infinite torture, to put on our boots again, and then
walked up the hill to the village-like town. besides the church of mixed
romanesque and gothic, there was nothing worth seeing there, unless the
spectacle of a woman holding up a rabbit by the hind-legs, while her
daughter, a tender-hearted damsel of about sixteen, whacked it behind the
ears with a fire-shovel, may be thought improving to the mind. at a shop
where we bought some things, hugh was deeply offended by a woman who
insisted that some rather small bathing-drawers were large enough for him,
and especially for speaking of him as the _petit garcon_. he talked about
her 'cheek' all the way back to the boat. it was on returning that i
noticed the picturesque charm of our mill, with the old gothic bridge
adjoining it, a weather-beaten, time-worn stone cross rising from the
parapet. fresh provisions having been put on board the boat, we wished our
friends of the mill good-bye. they and their children, with about a dozen
neighbours and their children, assembled upon the bank to see us off. a
long line of dancing rapids lay in front of us, so that we were really able
to astonish the people by the speed at which we went away where any boat
of the dronne would have quickly gone aground. in a few minutes the strong
current had carried us a mile, and then, looking back, we saw the little
crowd still gazing at us. a turn of the stream, and they had lost sight of
us for ever.

under the next mill-dam was some deep water free from reeds and weeds. on
the banks were tall trees; behind us was the rocky weir, over which the
stream fell in a thousand little rivulets and runnels, and less than a
hundred yards in front rose the seemingly impenetrable reedy forest. the
spot so enclosed had a quiet beauty that would have been holy in days gone
by when the mind of man peopled such solitudes with fluvial deities. here
the desire to swim became irresistible. what a swim it was! the water was
only cold enough to be refreshing, while its transparency was such that
even where it was eight or ten feet deep every detail could be seen along
the gravelly bottom, where the gudgeons gambolled. after the bath we
paddled until we saw a very shady meadow-corner close to the water. here
we spread out upon the grass eggs that had been boiled for us at the mill,
bread, cheese, grapes, and pears, and what other provisions we had. now and
again the wind carried to us the sound of water turning some hidden, lazy
wheel. those who would prefer a well-served lunch in a comfortable room to
our simple meal in the meadow-corner under the rustling leaves should never
go on a voyage down the dronne.

some time in the afternoon we came to a broad weir that was rather
difficult to pass, for there was no water running over, and a dense
vegetation had sprung up during the summer between the rough stones. the
miller saw us from the other end of his dam, which was a rather long way
off, for these weirs do not cross at right angles with the banks, but
start at a very obtuse one at a point far above the mill. after a little
hesitation, inspired by doubtfulness as to what manner of beings we were,
he came towards us over the stones and through the water-plants with a
bog-trotting movement which we, who had scraped most of the skin off our
own bare ankles, quite understood.

he was a rough but good fellow, and he lent us a helping hand, which was
needed, for every time we lifted the boat now it seemed heavier than it
was before. the hard work was telling upon us. the sound of voices caused
another head to appear on the scene. it came up from the other side of the
weir, and it was a cunning old head, with sharp little eyes under bushy
gray brows, overhanging like penthouses. presently the body followed the
head, and the old man began to talk to the miller in patois, but failing,
apparently, to make any impression upon him, he addressed me in very bad
french.

'why give yourselves the devil's trouble,' said he,' in pulling the
boat over here, when there is a beautiful place at the other end of the
_barrage_, where you can go down with the current? the water is a bit
jumpy, but there is nothing to fear.'

for a moment i hesitated, but i saw the miller shake his head; and this
decided me to cross at the spot where we were. the old man looked on with
an expression that was not benevolent, and when the boat was ready to be
dropped on the other side, the motive of his anxiety to send us down a
waterfall came out. he had spread a long net here in amongst the reeds, and
he did not wish us to spoil his fishing.

when we got below the mill we saw the water that was not wanted for the
wheel, tumbling in fury down a steep, narrow channel, in which were set
various poles and cross-beams. and it was down this villainous _diversoir_
that the old rascal would have sent us, knowing that we should have come to
grief there. the boat would almost certainly have struck some obstacle and
been overturned by the current.

sometimes people rushed from the fields where they were working to the
banks to watch us. dark men, with bare chests, and as hairy as monkeys;
women, likewise a good deal bare, with heads covered by great sun-bonnets,
and children burnt by the sun to the colour of young arabs, stood and gazed
speechless with astonishment. who were we in this strange-looking boat that
went so fast, and whence had we come? they knew that we must have come a
long, long way; but, how did we do it? how did we get over the _barrages_?
these were the thoughts that puzzled them. no boat had ever been known to
treat the obstacles of the dronne in this jaunty fashion before.

several more weirs were passed; one with great difficulty, for the canoe
had to be dragged and jolted thirty or forty yards through the corner of a
wood. then the evening fell again when we were following the windings of a
swift current that ran now to the right and now to the left of what seemed
to be a broad marsh covered with reeds and sedges. sometimes the current
carried us into banks gloomy with drooping alders, or densely fringed with
brambles. when i heard squeals behind, i knew that hugh was diving through
a blackberry-bush, or a hanging garden of briars.

i was sorry for him; but my business was to keep the canoe's head in the
centre of the current, and leave the stern to follow as it might. at every
sudden turning hugh became exceedingly watchful; but in spite of his
steering the stern would often swing round into the bank, and then there
was nothing for him to do but to duck his head as low as he could, and try
to leave as little as possible of his ears upon the brambles. before the
end of this day he gave signs of restlessness and discontent.

our stopping-place to-night was to be la roche chalais, a rather important
village, just within the department of the dordogne. we still seemed to be
far from it, notwithstanding all the haste we had made. while the air and
water were glowing with the last flush of twilight, myriads of swallows,
already on their passage from the north, spotted the clear sky, and settled
down upon the alders to pass the night. at our approach they rose again,
and filled the solitude with the whirr of their wings. we likewise
disturbed from the alders great multitudes of sparrows that had become
gregarious. they stayed in the trees until the boat was about twenty yards
from them, and then rose with the noise of a storm-wind beating the leaves.
one of the charms of this waterfaring is, that you never know what surprise
the angle of a river may bring. very tired, and rather down at heart, we
turned a bend and saw in front of us a clear placid reach, on which the
reds and purples were serenely dying, and at a distance of about half a
mile, a fine bridge with the large central arch forming with its reflection
in the water a perfect ellipse.

on the left of the bridge was a wooded cliff, the edges of the trees
vaguely passing into one another and the purple mist, and above them all,
against the warmly-fading sky was the spire of a church. that, said i, can
be no other than the church of la roche chalais; and so it turned out.

there was a large mill below the bridge, where we met with much politeness,
and where our boat was taken charge of. here we were told there was a good
hotel at la roche, and we set off to find it. but how did we set off?
with bare feet, carrying our boots in our hands, and looking the veriest
scarecrows after our four days of amphibious life. we had tried to put on
our boots, but vainly, for they had been flooded. now, this was the chief
cause of the unpleasantness that soon befell us, for no pilgrims ever had
more disgraceful-looking feet than ours. fortunately it was nearly dark,
and the people whom we met did not examine us very attentively. moreover,
they saw bare feet on the road and in the street every day of their lives
during the summer.

at the inn, however, our appearance made an instantaneously bad impression.
it was the most important hotel in a considerable district. it lay in the
beat of many commercial travellers--men who never go about with bare
feet, or in dirty flannel and battered straw hats, but are always dressed
beautifully. we walked straight into the house, with that perfect composure
which the french say is distinctly british, and sudden consternation fell
upon the people there. two elderly ladies, sister hotel-keepers--one of
whom had a rather strongly-marked moustache, for which, of course, poor
woman, she was not responsible--came out of the kitchen, and stood in the
passage fronting us. it was not to welcome us to their hostelry, but to
prevent us penetrating any farther, that they took up this position.

'mesdames,' said i, 'we want rooms, if you please, to-night, and also
dinner.'

'monsieur,' replied the lady with the moustache, 'i am sorry, but--but--all
our rooms are occupied.'

'you are afraid of us, madame?'

'yes, monsieur, i am.'

this i thought very frank indeed; and i was turning over in my mind what i
had better say next, when she continued:

'we never take travellers without baggage.'

'but,' said i, holding out my knapsack in one hand, and my boots in the
other, 'i have baggage.' perceiving that the expression did not change, i
added:

'i have also a boat.'

'a boat!'

'yes, a boat.'

'where is it?'

'on the river. i have left it at the mill just below here. we have come
from st. apre.'

'st. apre! and where are you going?'

'to coutras, i hope.'

by this time several persons who had collected in the passage and the
kitchen were grinning from ear to ear. i felt that all eyes were fixed upon
my red feet, and not liking the situation, i resolved to end it.

'as you are afraid, i will give you my card.' so saying, i pushed my way
into the _salle a manger_, and pulled out a card, which, marvellous to
say, i had managed to keep dry. now, the card itself conveyed nothing of
importance to anybody. it was the manner of saying, 'i will give you my
card,' together with the movement that meant, 'i am here, and i intend to
stop,' that broke down the resolution of the two women to turn us from
their door.

their confidence gradually came, and they gave us a very good dinner,
notwithstanding the lateness of the hour. we had comfortable beds, too, and
the next morning we got our feet into our boots. we bought our provisions
for the day at the inn, and to avoid the curiosity of the natives, we
escaped by a back way, and hobbled down to the boat through a rocky field.

the stream was strong for a few miles below the mill at la roche. the canoe
went down by itself fast enough, but the water had to be watched carefully,
for the bed was strewn with rocks. sometimes we shot over blocks of
limestone that were only three or four inches below the surface. we could
not be sure from one minute to another that our rapid flight would not
meet with a sudden check. in this excitement of uncertainty there was true
pleasure. we chose our first spot for bathing where the current was strong,
and had our second swim in a wide and beautiful pool, where the table-like
rocks, smooth and polished, could be seen ten or twelve feet below the
surface. then having spread out our provisions once more on the river bank
in a nook that seemed to be far from village, or even homestead, we had an
unpleasant surprise. about a dozen boys, on their way home from some hidden
school, suddenly appeared round a wooded corner, and after being brought to
a momentary standstill by their own astonishment, made straight towards
us. having examined the canoe with much curiosity, they sat down in a
half-circle just behind us, with minds evidently made up to wait and see us
off. they watched us through our meal with much interest, and made jokes in
patois at our expense. they were not, however, so boldly bad as many boys,
and there was no sufficient reason to drive them away. moreover, they may
have had a better right to be there than we. the field may have belonged to
the father of one of them. i suggested to them that their mothers might be
anxious, if not angry, on account of their loitering; but they were not to
be moved by any such reminders. they had made up their minds to see us off,
and this they did, to their great delight and entertainment.

the river was charming, with its myriads of white water-lilies and forests
of reeds. once it spread out into a lake, in which was a little island
covered with tall bulrushes and purple loosestrife. but although there was
so much pleasure for the eye, the afternoon was one of suffering. we were
blistering from the heat of the sun, and our bottles being emptied, we were
tormented with thirst. it was true that there was plenty of water always
within reach; but it had already run past a good many villages and small
towns, and, moreover, it was tepid. after leaving la roche chalais the
river had on its left bank the department of the dordogne, and on its
right the charente inferieure. rather late in the afternoon we entered the
gironde, and soon afterwards heard the familiar sound of women beating
linen with their _battoirs_ by the side of the water. we came upon a crowd
of them, and learnt from them that the village of les eglisottes was
close by. having obtained here both water and white wine, we were able to
continue the voyage in better spirits.

this fifth and last day on the dronne was the most trying of all. the
distance may not have been more than twenty-five miles, but we were very
jaded. there were few weirs, but some of them were not easy to pass. then
the boat from time to time had to be dragged a long way through reeds,
where there was not enough water to float it. for eight or nine hours the
sun raged above us; but the cool evening came at length--about the time
that we passed the last mill. the river was broad and deep, and i thought
that we could not be far from coutras; but long reaches succeeded one
another, and the great forests of the double on the left seemed as if they
would never end.

the river is now running--or, rather, creeping, for it has lost its
current--under densely-wooded hills, and the water is deeply dyed with
interflowing tints of green and gold. these fade, and in the gathering
darkness without a moon the silent dronne grows very sombre. the boat must
have received an exceptionally hard knock at the last weir, for we feel the
water rising about our feet. the wonder is that our frail craft has taken
its five days' bumping over stumps and stones so well. it would be very
annoying if it were to sink with us now that we are so near the end of our
voyage. but is the end so near? we scan the distance in front of us in
search of twinkling lights, but the only twinkle comes from a brightening
star. we see the long wan line of water, marked with awful shadows near the
banks, from which, too, half-submerged trees, long since dead, lift strange
arms or stretch out long necks and goblin heads that seem to mock and jibe
at us in this fashion: 'ha! ha! you are going down! we'll drag you under!'
and the interminable black forest stretches away, away, always in front,
until it is lost in the dusky sky.

ah, there is a sound at length to break the monotonous dip, dip of the
paddles, and it is a sweet sound too. it is the angelus; there is no
mistaking it. it is very faint, but it puts fresh strength into our arms,
and revives the hope that this river will lead us somewhere.

it led us to coutras. there at about nine o'clock we beached the half
water-logged canoe not far above the spot to which the tide rises from the
broad atlantic. we felt that we had had quite enough waterfaring to satisfy
us for the present. we had voyaged about eighty miles, and passed about
forty weirs.




by the lower dordogne


[illustration: a street at st. emilion.]

the nooks and corners where great men of the past spent their lives quietly
and thoughtfully often lie far enough from the beaten ways to provide the
romantic tramp with a motive that he may need to excuse his singularity
in faring on foot over a tract of country which lacks the kind of
picturesqueness that would mark it out as a territory to be annexed by the
tourist sooner or later. having found myself, almost unexpectedly, in the
district of michel de montaigne, after crossing the double, i reckoned
that less than a day's quiet walking would bring me to the village of
st. michel-bonnefare--better known in the region as st. michel-montaigne
(pronounced there montagne, as the name was originally spelt), close to the
castle or manor-house where the contemplative perigourdin gentleman was
born, and where he wrote his 'essays' in a tower, of which he has left a
detailed description. then there was another lure: the battle-field of
castillon, a few miles farther south, where the heroic talbot was slain,
and where the cannon that fired the fatal stone announced the end of the
feudal ages. we may travel over the whole world of literature without going
beyond our house and garden. even the blind may read, and thus bring back
to themselves the life of the past; but how the indolent mind is helped
when spurred by the eye's impressions! the eye awakens ideas that might
otherwise sleep on for ever, by looking at scenes filled with the living
interest of a montaigne or a talbot.

i might have got to within four miles or thereabouts of the castle of
montaigne, by using the railroad that runs up the valley of the lower
dordogne, but i preferred to start on foot from montpont. this manner of
travelling is very old-fashioned, but it will always possess a certain
charm for two classes of people: habitual vagabonds who beg and are freely
accused of stealing, and the literary, artistic, antiquarian, or scientific
vagabonds who take to tramping by fits and starts. the latter class, being
quite incomprehensible to the rustic mind in guyenne, are regarded by it
with almost as much suspicion as the other.

i started at the hour of seven in the morning, which the french--earlier
risers than the english--think a late one for beginning the work of a
summer day in the provinces. i will not say that the plain on which i now
tramped for some miles was uninteresting, because all nature is interesting
if we are only in the right mood to observe and be instructed; but to me
it was dull, for i had been spoilt by much rambling in up and down country
full of strong contrasts. here i saw on each side of me wide expanses of
field, with scarcely a hedge or tree, all dotted with grazing cattle. not
a few of the animals were in the charge of muscular, aggressive dogs, that
interpreted their duty too largely, and made themselves a nuisance. at
intervals were patches of maize or pumpkins, or a bit of vineyard with a
house hard by facing the road--a low ground-floor house solidly built,
but its plainness unrelieved by the grace of a vine-trellis or a climbing
flower. by-and-by the land became somewhat hilly, and the pasturage changed
gradually to open wood and heath, where the gorse was already gilding its
summer green, and the bracken stood palm-like in purple deserts of heather.
then the ideas began to warm in the sunny silence, and i fear that i
rejoiced in the sterility of the soil which had preserved the charm of free
and untormented nature.

when i reached the village-like town of villefranche, i perceived a
movement of men and women like that of bees around a hive. i chanced to
arrive on the day of the local fair, when everybody expects to make some
money, from the peasant proprietor or the _metayer_ who brings in his corn
or cattle, to the small shopkeeper who lives upon the agriculturist. i felt
disposed to lunch at the grandest hotel in villefranche, and a good woman
whom i consulted on the subject led me through throngs of bartering
peasants and cattle-dealers, forests of horns, and by the upturned jaws of
braying asses, until she stopped before an inn. there all was bustle and
commotion. a swarm of women had been called in to help in anticipation of
the crush, and they got in one another's way, walked upon the cats' tails,
and raised the tumult of a boxing-booth with the rattle of their tongues.
all this was in the kitchen; but there was a side-room in which a long
table had been laid for the guests. i took a place at this rustic
_table-d'hote_, and i had on each side of me and in front of me men in
blouses who talked in patois or in french, as the mood suited them. i had
already perceived that, as i drew nearer to bordeaux, the southern dialect
became more and more a jargon, in which there were not only many french
words, but french phrases. these men in blouses were rough sons of the
soil, but i soon gathered that some of them were very well off. in
provincial france dress counts for very little as a sign of fortune's
favour. there were men at the table whose burly forms and full-coloured
faces were just what one would expect to see at a market dinner in an
english country town; but their epicurean style of dealing lightly with
each dish, so that the charm of variety might not be spoilt by a too hasty
satisfaction of hunger, and the unanimity with which they asked for coffee
at the close, marked a strong difference in habits and manners. their
politeness to me was almost excessive. as soon as the most jovial member of
the company--who had undertaken the carving had cut up a piece of meat or
a fowl, the dish was invariably passed from his end of the table to mine,
where i sat alone.

before leaving villefranche, a low, square tower enticed me to the parish
church. the building was originally romanesque, but the pointed style must
have been grafted upon the other so long ago as the english period. outside
the walls, some steps led me into a little chapel half underground. it was
a barrel-vaulted crypt, sternly simple, and lighted only by one very narrow
romanesque window in the apse, just above a rough stone altar of ancient
pattern, with a statue of the dead christ on the ground beneath the slab.
in the semi-darkness, the flame of a solitary candle shone without smoke or
motion, as if it had been there for centuries, and like all the rest had
grown very old.

i had climbed to the ruined castle of gurcons, where sloes and blackberries
were waiting for the birds in the feudal court strewn with stones. i had
left the village of montpeyroux, with the sound of flails weakening on
the wind, and late in the afternoon was drawing near to the castle of
montaigne, when a small wayside auberge tempted me from the hot road. the
woman who waited upon me had a fat body and a hard, firmly inquisitive
face--a combination to be distrusted. having settled down again to her
knitting, she inquired of me where i was going, and when i told her that i
was on my way to the chateau de montaigne, she asked me if i had any work
to do there. i evaded this question, not knowing, or not wishing to know,
exactly what she meant. she reflected a few minutes, then, looking at me
over her knitting-needles, she said:

'are you a tiler or a plasterer?'

now, this was a question that i was quite unprepared for. i had often been
set down as a pedlar. i had been suspected of being a travelling musician,
and also a colporteur for the salvation army; in fact, of being almost
everything but a tiler or plasterer. but this shrewd woman had evidently
come to the conclusion that, if i did not work upon the housetops, i must
perforce be an artist of the trowel. i assured her that i was as incapable
of fixing a tile as of making a ceiling; whereupon she said:

'i beg your pardon. i thought you were a workman.'

as i left, i saw by the vivacity with which she scratched the back of her
head with a knitting-needle that she was writhing mentally with the torture
of unsatisfied curiosity; and i took a malignant pleasure in her suffering.
the white flannel that i was wearing was the most agreeable reason i could
think of for being associated with plaster, but my resemblance to a tiler
continued to perplex me as i trudged along the road.

i now left the broad highway, and took a narrower road that went for
some distance through woods up the side of a long hill. the shadows were
gathering under the trees, and i was beginning to fear that i should reach
the castle too late to carry out my pilgrimage that night, when i saw above
me, upon a knoll resting upon rocky buttresses, a modern mansion against a
background of trees. this was the very pleasant country residence built by
m. magne, minister of finance under the second empire, upon the site of the
castle of montaigne, which the author of the 'essays,' with a better sense
of certain distinctions than that which is observed nowadays, preferred to
speak of as his _manoir_. this manor-house still preserved its fifteenth
and sixteenth century character, when a fire breaking out destroyed
everything but the walls, and gave m. magne a plausible excuse for the
demolition. a part that was spared by the fire, and was therefore suffered
to remain intact, was the almost isolated tower, to which montaigne
withdrew for the sake of quiet and meditation, and which is so well known
to all readers of his 'essays.' had this also disappeared, i should have
had no motive for wandering down the long avenue at nearly the end of the
day.

i met with a courteous reception at the mansion, and obtained immediate
permission to visit the retreat of the sixteenth-century moralist who
looked with such clear eyes upon human life.

[illustration: the chateau de montaigne after the fire.]

the tower and its gateway belong to the period when feudalism had lost its
vitality, and life was troubled by the vague perception of new motives and
principles. montaigne tells us that his family had occupied the manor
a hundred years when he entered into possession, and the style of the
fragment that is left bears out this statement: it appears to belong to the
middle part of the fifteenth century. already manorial houses, crenated and
often moated, but, like this one at montaigne, defensive rather for show
than the reality, were scattered over france. speaking generally, they
belonged to the small nobility who fell under the category of the
_arriere-ban_ in time of war. in this tower montaigne had his chapel, his
bedroom--to which he retired when the yearning for solitude was strong--and
his library. the chapel is on the ground-floor, and is very much what
it was in montaigne's time. it is small, but there was room enough to
accommodate his household, which was never a large one. its little
cupola connects it with the local style of architecture, to which the
high-swelling name of byzantino-perigourdin has been given. a small stone
altar occupies the apsidal end, and here, as in two or three other places,
the arms of montaigne will be noted with interest by those who have read in
the essays: '_je porte d'azur seme de trefles d'or, a une patte de lyon de
mesme armee de gueules, mise en face_.'

a man is often a sceptic on the surface and a believer underneath. pascal
has called montaigne '_un pur pyrrhonien_'; but pascal himself has been
accused of scepticism. living in an age when the crimes daily committed in
the name of religion might so easily have inspired a hater of violence like
montaigne with a horror of creeds, he was no philosopher of the god-denying
sort. moreover, notwithstanding his doubting moods and his fondness of the
words '_que sais-je?_' he upheld the practice of religion in his own home,
and died a christian.

he shared, however, the eccentricity of louis xi. in keeping himself out
of sight when he attended the religious services in his chapel. in the
vaulting near the entrance is a small opening communicating with a narrow
passage, by means of which montaigne could leave his bedroom and hear mass
without showing himself; but in order to do so he had to grope along his
rabbit's burrow almost on hands and knees. to reach his bedroom from the
ground, he climbed up the spiral staircase as the visitor does today. the
steps are much worn in places, and the boots of the essayist must have had
something to do with this, for he probably used the tower more than any
other man. the room, nearly circular in shape, with brick floor and small
windows, looks to modern eyes more like a prison than a bed-chamber
befitting a nobleman. but independently of the great difference in
the ideas of home comfort which prevailed in the upper ranks of
sixteenth-century society, compared to those of the same class to-day,
montaigne, like all men with large minds, loved simplicity. his father, who
rode the hobby-horse of frugal and severe training to an extent that might
have proved disastrous to his son michel, had not the boy been singularly
well endowed by nature to correspond to his parent's wishes, had nurtured
him in the scorn of luxury by methods which would be considered very
crotchety nowadays. but this could not have been 'my chamber' in which king
henry of navarre slept, in 1584, when he paid a visit to montaigne at his
fortified house. there was a better one in that part of the building which
has disappeared. montaigne tells, with his quaint humour, that he was in
the habit of retiring to his bedroom in the tower so that he might rule
there undisturbed, and have a corner apart from what he curiously terms the
'conjugal, filial, and civil community.' and he expresses pity for the man
who is not able to 'hide himself' in the same way when the humour leads him
to do so.

it was in the room above, however, where he enjoyed to the full the
pleasures of contemplation and quietude. here, he tells us, he had
installed his library, in what had previously been regarded as the most
useless part of his mansion. the position had certain advantages. 'i
can see beneath me my garden and my poultry-yard, and can look into the
principal parts of my house.' it appears from this that he was so much 'in
the clouds,' that he did not occasionally find satisfaction from peeping
through windows to see what others were doing. it is in this way that the
old writers reveal themselves, and they keep themselves in sympathy with
mankind by not affecting to be above the little weaknesses common to
humanity. here montaigne spent the greater part of his time, except in
winter, when he often found the library too draughty to be comfortable. it
was in this room that he wrote his essays, and chiefly thought them out
while pacing up and down the floor, which even then was so uneven that the
only flat bit was where he had placed his table and chair. in common with
some other celebrated writers, he found that his thoughts went to sleep
when he sat down. 'my. mind does not work unless the legs make it move.
those who study without a book are all in the same state.'

montaigne was no despiser of books; on the contrary, he was a great reader,
and one of the most scholarly men of his age; but he had his fits of
reading like other people, and the intervals between them were sometimes
long. without a doubt, these intervals were the most productive periods.
the educational system to which he was subjected as a child was enough to
disgust him with books, and to separate him for ever from them as soon as
he had obtained his freedom. he was crammed with latin, as a goose that
has to be fattened is crammed with maize in his own perigord. he was not
allowed to speak even to his mother in french or in perigourdin. such was
the will of his father, who must have been a rather difficult man to live
with, and one whom a woman of spirit in this century would kill or cure
with curtain lectures if his interference with her in the nursery should
outrage the instincts of maternity. the very small boy was handed over to
tutors, whose instructions were to make latin his first language, and even
his mother and servants were compelled to pick up enough latin words to
carry on some sort of conversation with him.

in the printers' preface to one of the earliest editions of the 'essays,'
it is said: '_somme, ils se_ _latiniserent tant qu'il en regorgea jusque
a leurs villages tout autour, ou ont pris pied par usage plusieurs
appellations latines d'artisans et d'outils.'_ it is just possible that
some of these latin terms may have lingered in the district to the present
day; but it would need a great deal of patience to find them, and to
distinguish them from the patois of the people. montaigne was more than six
years old before he was allowed to say a word in french or in the dialect
of perigord--that of arnaud and bertrand de born. he finished his austere
education at the then celebrated college of guyenne, at bordeaux, where,
according to local authorities, he had among his teachers the scotch poet,
george buchanan.

'when young,' writes montaigne, 'i studied for show; afterwards to grow
wiser; now i study for diversion.' he liked to have his books around him
even when he did not read them. numerous reading-desks were distributed
over the brick floor of this circular room, and upon them he placed his
favourite volumes. he therefore read standing, according to the very
general custom of his time, which was doubtless better than our own, of
making our backs crooked by sitting and bending over our books. according
to his own admission, he had a bad memory, therefore he must have been in
frequent need of referring to his tomes for the quotations from ancient
authors which he was so fond of bringing into his text, and which make a
writer at this end of the nineteenth century smile at the thought of how
all the quills would rise upon that fretful and pampered porcupine, the
reading public of to-day, if latin and greek were ladled out to it after
montaigne's fashion.

the room is bare, with the exception of the wreck of an armchair of
uncertain history; but upon the forty-seven beams crossing the ceiling are
fifty-four inscriptions in latin and greek, written, or rather painted,
with a brush by montaigne. their interest has suffered a little from the
restoration which some of them have undergone; but there they are, the
crystals of thought picked up by the hermit of the tower in his wanderings
along the highways and byways of ancient literature, and which he fastened,
as it were, to the beams over his head, just where the peasants to-day hang
their dry sausages, their bacon, and strings of garlic. many persons copy
sentences out of their favourite books, with the intention of tasting their
savour again and again; but if they do not lose them, they are generally
too busy or too indolent afterwards to look for them. montaigne, however,
had his favourite texts always before his eyes.

the curious visitor intent upon a discovery will be sure to find in these
the philosophical scaffolding of the 'essays;' but i, who examine such
things somewhat superficially, would rather believe that montaigne
inscribed them upon the rough wood because they expressed in a few words
much that he had already thought or felt. by the extracts that a man makes
for his private satisfaction from the authors who please him, the bent of
his intellect and cast of character can be very accurately judged. if
other testimony were wanting, these sentences would prove the gravely
philosophical temper of montaigne's mind, notwithstanding the flippant
confessions of frailty which he mingles sometimes so incongruously with
the reflections of a sage. most of the extracts are from latin and
greek authors, but not a few are from the books of ecclesiastes and
ecclesiasticus and the epistles of st. paul. here one sees written by the
hand of the sixteenth century thinker the noble words of terence:

  'homo sum, humani a me nihil alienum puto.'

then one catches sight of this line by the sagacious horace:

  'quid aeternis minorem consiliis animum fatigas?'

looking at another piece of timber, one slowly spells out the words:

  'o miseras hominum mentes! o pectora caeca!'

and so one follows the track of montaigne's mind from rafter to rafter.

had i been left alone here while the evening shadows gathered in the tower,
i might soon have seen the figure of a man in trunk-hose, doublet, and
ruff, with pointed beard and pensive eyes, moving noiselessly between rows
of spectral desks covered by spectral books; but, as it was, even in the
most shadowy corner i could not detect the faintest outline of a ghost.
nobody knows what has become of all the volumes which were here, and which
were said to have numbered a thousand. they were given by montaigne's only
surviving child, his daughter leonore, to the abbe de roquefort, but what
became of them afterwards is a mystery. there is a small room adjoining the
library, the one that montaigne mentions as having a fireplace. the hearth
where he sat and warmed himself has scarcely changed. here on the walls
may be seen traces of paintings. they are supposed to be the work of a
travelling artist, to whom montaigne gave food and shelter in exchange
for his labour. it would appear from this that he was careful not to ruin
himself by the encouragement of art. montaigne, however, had a good nature,
although he may not have cared to spend money on bad pictures. he has told
us of his efforts to reclaim little beggars, and to make them respectable
members of society. before the present chateau was built, the old kitchen
could be seen where he warmed and fed the young mendicants, who, having
been refreshed and comforted, returned to their old ways, '_les gueux ayant
leurs magnificences et leurs voluptes comme les riches_.'

the village of st. michel is close to the chateau, but is of much more
ancient origin, as its church plainly shows. the venerable romanesque
door-way was to me more beautiful because of the purple spots of
snapdragon, that shone in the clear dimness of the twilight like little
coloured lamps about the crevices of the old stones. it is uncertain
whether montaigne was christened here or in the family chapel. it was a
strange christening wherever it took place, for we are told that he was
'held over the font' by persons of most humble condition, his father's
motive in this matter being, according to the printers of the early edition
of the 'essays' already referred to, 'to attach him to those who might
have need of him rather than to those of whom he might have need.' it was
papessu, another village in the neighbourhood, to which he was sent as
a nurseling, and where, in obedience to the injunctions of his spartan
father, he was treated like one of the peasant family with whom he was
placed. he was reared from his cradle in frugality and philosophy, and,
considering what an unpleasant childhood he must have passed, it is truly
wonderful that he fulfilled parental expectations, and did not turn out a
hard drinker and a brawling cavalier.

there is a tradition in perigord which some local writers have accepted as
fact, that the montaigne family was of english origin. it is not easy to
ascertain the ground on which it rests. the patronymic was eyquem, and the
_chevalier-seigneur_, who settled in perigord and took the territorial
title of montagne or montaigne, came from the bordelais.

that is about all that is really known of the family. if the eyquem had
borne a prominent part against the french kings in the long wars which had
not ended a hundred years before the birth of the moralist, this would have
been sufficient to account for their being described as english.

speaking of the peasants of his district, montaigne tells us that their
dress was 'more distant from ours than that of a man who is only clothed
with his skin.' from this we have a right to suppose that their appearance
was original, if not picturesque. to-day it is neither one nor the other.
with the exception of the kerchief tied round the back of the head, after
the fashion of the perigourdine or the bordelaise, by some of the women,
these peasants wear nothing to distinguish them from those who have
entirely abandoned a local costume.

i was in no way pleased with the villagers of st. michel-montaigne, nor did
they seem to be agreeably impressed by me. those to whom i spoke did not
conceal their surprise that i had been allowed to see over the castle. i
think they must have set me down for something less respectable than a
plasterer, and i began to think quite seriously that i was neglecting my
appearance. then i thought of the knapsack, which was really getting to
look, from long usage, as if the time had come for placing it in the way of
a deserving _chiffonnier_, but i could not make up my mind to buy another.
i was anxious to pass the night in the village, for i hoped that the
inhabitants had preserved some traditions of montaigne; but there was only
a small and very dirty-looking auberge that had any pretension to lodge
man and beast, and here the hostess rejected my overtures with vivacity.
consequently, i was compelled to trudge on, and as i left the place i shook
the dust from off my feet at the inhabitants. there was plenty of it, but i
am afraid it did them little harm.

the road, now descending towards the dordogne, passed through great
vineyards, and there was enough light for the clustered bunches of grapes
to be seen on every vine. under the calm sky, still full of the heat of the
summer day, and glowing duskily, the wide, sloping land offered up all its
myriads of broad, motionless leaves and its wealth of fruit to the god of
wine. o gentle peace of the summer night that has still the bloom of the
sun upon its dusky cheek--peace untroubled by any sound save the joyous
shrilling of the cricket that has climbed upon the darkening leaf--why do i
hurry onward upon the dusty road, instead of sitting upon a bank amid the
fragrant thyme and agrimony, and letting the mind lay in great store of
your sweetness against the cold and dismal nights to come?

i reached the village of la mothe by the dordogne, and while i was casting
about for an inn that looked comfortable, and also hospitable, i met
a pretty little brunette with a rich southern colour in her cheeks,
charmingly coifed _a la bordelaise_, and tripping jauntily along with a
coffee-pot in her hand. it was pleasant to look at a nice face again after
all the ill-favoured visages that had risen up against me during the second
half of the day, and so i stopped this pretty girl and asked her to tell me
which was the best hotel in the place. she would not answer the question,
but she mentioned a hotel which she said was as good as any. thither i
went, and found a comfortable little inn, where i was well received. i had
not been there long when the little brunette entered. she was the 'daughter
of the house.' i now understood that her hesitation was conscientious.

the hostess was a small, sprightly woman with a smiling face, which,
together with her bright-coloured coif gracefully hanging to her black
hair, made up such a head as puts one in a good temper for a whole evening.
she was so highly civilized that she actually asked me if i would like to
wash my hands. i expected that she was going to lead me to one of those
little cisterns--'fountains' in french--attached to the wall, that one sees
throughout guyenne, and which have come down almost unchanged in form, as
well as the roller-towels that often go with them, from the feudal castles
of the twelfth century; but i was wrong. she led me to a bucket. filling
a large ladle with water, she fixed it lengthwise, and the handle being a
tube, the water ran slowly out from the end. i quite understood that i had
to wash my hands with the trickling water, for i had often done it before.
these ladles with hollow handles are also used for sprinkling the floors,
which are never washed in southern france. the sprinkling lays the dust,
cools the air, and depresses the fleas for at least a quarter of an hour.

after i had dealt with a well-cooked little dinner, plentifully bedewed
with a pleasant but not insidious wine grown upon the sunny slopes above
the dordogne, i made the discovery that the best room in the house was
occupied by the dark-eyed damsel, except when a guest came along who
managed to ingratiate himself with her mother, and then the daughter had
to turn out. the room was not exactly luxurious, for it contained little
besides the bed, a table, and a chair, but it was bright and clean; and
when i had confided myself to the strong hempen sheets that had still half
a century of wear in them, and had passed the first quarter of an
hour, which is always critical, without being made aware by scouts and
skirmishers of the advance of a hostile force, i was very thankful that i
was not received with open arms in the village of st. michel-montaigne.

the next morning i met the dordogne again after a long separation. it was
now a great river flowing quietly through a vine-covered plain. the rapids
had all been left far away, but it had begun to feel the tide, and this
to a river is like the first shock of death. it struggles for awhile with
destiny, and a sadder sound than the cry which it made when it came forth
from the rock or the little lake is heard in the quiet evening or the more
solemn night. although it is flowing back to its true source, the river
shrinks from the vast and mysterious ocean as we shrink ourselves from the
immense unknown.

but at this hour of eight in the morning, with a sun so bright and a sky so
blue, only the broad and serene beauty of the water makes itself felt. as
the river goes curving over the vine-covered land, its stillness is almost
that of a lake, and it mirrors nothing but the sky, save the trees and
flowers of it's banks. the moments are precious, for the tender loveliness
of the landscape will wane as the light gains strength.

on each side of the dordogne, between the water and the vineyards, which
stretch away with scarcely a break across the plain and up the sides of the
distant hills, is a strip of rough field. the sunshine of four months, with
hardly a shower to moisten the earth, has made flowers scarce, but on this
long curving bend of coarse meadow the grass has kept something of its
greenness, and the season of blossoming stays by the beautiful stream.
there is a wanton tangling and mingling of the waste-loving flowers, such
as the yellow toad-flax, the bristling viper's bugloss, the thorny ononis
that spreads a hue of pink as it creeps along the ground, sky-blue chicory
on wiry stems, large milk-white blooms of _datura_, and purple heads of
_centaurea calcitrapa_, whose spines are avoided like those of a hedgehog
by people who walk with bare feet. upon the banks, the high hemp-agrimony
and purple loosestrife, with here and there an evening primrose, flaunt
their masses of colour over the water or the pebbly shore.

from a distant church tower that rises above the wilderness of vines
a clear-voiced bell calls through the morning air, _sanctus! sanctus!
sanctus!_ by which all know who care to think of it that the priest
standing at the altar there has come to the most solemn part of his mass.

wandering on, indifferent to the flight of time, upon these pleasant banks,
which, but for a bullock-cart that came jolting and creaking along by
the edge of the vines, i might have thought quite abandoned by all other
humanity, i saw afar off a little cluster of white houses that seemed to
be floating on the blue water. i knew that this could be nothing else but
castillon, and that the effect of floating houses was an illusion caused by
a bend of the river. and so i was nearing at length that place where the
destinies of france and england, so long interwoven, became again distinct,
and where the english nationality, which five-and-twenty years before was
in imminent danger of absorption as the fruit of victory, was decisively
saved from this fate by a defeat for which all england then in her
blindness mourned. the loss of guyenne made an alien dynasty national,
and by stopping the outflow of the anglo-saxon race upon the continent,
preserved its energies for the fulfilment of a very different destiny from
that which had almost begun when a peasant-girl dropped her distaff and
took up the sword.

on reaching castillon i had one of those disappointments to which a
traveller should always be prepared after being taught so often by
experience that distance idealizes a scene. how much less romantic the town
looked now than when i saw it floating, as it seemed, upon the sky-blue
water in a haze of gold-dust fired by the slanting rays! it was then like
the castillon of some troubadour's song; now it was a mean-looking little
sun-baked town modernized to downright plainness, with no remnant of its
ramparts remaining save a sombre old gothic gateway near the river, and no
ecclesiastical architecture deserving notice. its site, however, is the
same as that which it occupied in the middle ages, namely, close to the
dordogne, upon a ridge of rising land running up towards the hills which
close the valley on the north. on the eastern side this ridge for some
distance is so steep as to be almost escarped, but it is covered with grass
or vines; on the opposite side it is now only a little above the plain. the
battle was fought, not under the walls of the town, but somewhat to the
north-east of it in the open country.

talbot's mistake lay in the confidence with which he attacked an entrenched
army much stronger than his own, and especially in his contempt for messire
jean bureau's guns. the old leader now belonged to a dying epoch, and
his great faith in british and gascon archers may well have led him to
undervalue the power of artillery, notwithstanding that it was used with
terrible effect by edward iii. at crecy more than a hundred years before.
the french had profited by that lesson, and at castillon they turned the
tables on their tenacious adversaries.

it may be well to briefly recall the circumstances under which this
momentous battle was fought. one after another the english had been
compelled to surrender to the victorious armies of charles vii. their
fortresses in poitou, angoumois, guyenne and gascony; so that of their
immense province of aquitaine, which at one time stretched from the loire
to the pyrenees, they possessed nothing. even bordeaux, after remaining
faithful to england for 200 years, was a french city at the middle of the
fifteenth century. it would probably have remained so without any fresh
appeal to arms if charles vii. had treated the inhabitants with the same
justice, and accorded them the same liberties which they enjoyed while they
were the subjects of the english kings. it is a truly remarkable fact that,
although these kings were so intimately connected with france by blood and
ambition, they had borrowed enough of the genius of the anglo-saxon race
for establishing foreign possessions upon the solid basis of reciprocal
interest to make their administrative policy in aquitaine incomparably
better by its equity, the facilities which it afforded for local
government, the assertion of individual rights, and the growth of communal
prosperity, than that of the french kings and the great nobles who, while
owing homage, to the crown, were virtually sovereigns.

at no time was there much dissatisfaction with the rule of the english
sovereigns and their seneschals in western aquitaine. it was only in the
wilder parts of the country, such as the quercy and the rouergue, where
celtic blood was, and still is, almost pure, and where the people were very
difficult to govern--caesar had found that out before henry plantagenet,
becket, and john chandos--that there were frequent revolts, entailing as a
fatal consequence in those feudal ages barbaric repression. throughout the
flourishing bordelais the people became firmly and thoroughly attached
to the english cause, not less than the alsatians and lorrainers became
attached to that of france in later times--although there is no historical
parallel between the origin of the two connections. bordeaux was like
another london when the black prince held his splendid but profligate court
there. commercial interest had doubtless something to do with this fidelity
of the bordelais, for the wealthy english soon learnt to appreciate the
delicate flavour of the wines grown upon the chalky hillsides by the
garonne and the dordogne, and 500 years ago ships came from london and
bristol to bordeaux and returned laden with pipes and hogsheads; but a
sagacious and--the times being considered--a large-minded and generous
system of government gave to the people that feeling of security which
was then so rare, and which was the beginning of all patriotic sentiment.
french writers who have studied this subject frankly admit that we have
here the true explanation of the strong attachment of the bordelais and the
gascons to the english cause. as an illustration, it may not be amiss to
translate the following passages from 'les anglais en guyenne,' by m. d.
brissaud:

'the aquitanians had reason to thank the english government for not having
treated them as foreigners, like the inhabitants of a conquered province,
as the people of ireland, for example, had been treated, and for having
confined its action to the development of judicial institutions, of which
the germ was found in the feudal system of france.... the kings of england
not only refrained from setting themselves in opposition to the local
justice of the _arriere-fiefs_; we have seen them, and we shall see them
again in the history of the communal movement, favour the extension of
trial by peers, while accommodating at the same time their administrative
system to the spontaneous manifestations of opinion in a continental
country. they even took care in the composition of the courts that the
aquitanians should not feel the supremacy of the foreigner. with rare
exceptions, the _personnel_ of the courts of justice was recruited from
among the inhabitants of the province--a precious advantage at a time when
the predominance of provincial feeling caused those magistrates who were
sent from the north of france into the south by the capetian royalty to
be regarded as foreigners and enemies. the consequence of this choice by
england of aquitanians in preference to english in the composition of the
courts was that under philippe le bel or philippe de valois guyenne had
a right to consider itself in possession of a milder and more impartial
system of justice than other provinces of the south already attached like
languedoc to the crown of france.'

when, therefore, the bordelais fell under french rule, the exactions of
charles and the cynicism with which he broke faith, together with the
stagnation in the wine trade, caused the people to wish very heartily that
the english would return and try their luck again with the sword. a revolt
was secretly planned, in which many of the powerful barons of aquitaine
leagued themselves with the burghers of bordeaux, for the nobles were as
dissatisfied with the new state of things as the commoners. the earl of
shrewsbury, notwithstanding his great age, came over from england with a
very small following, and placed himself at the head of the insurrection.
the name of talbot was sufficient to fire the bordelais and the gascons
with enthusiasm and confidence. as the news of his landing in the medoc
spread, men rushed to arms and raised the old battle-cries of the english
in aquitaine. bordeaux opened its gates immediately to the veteran leader,
and the example was quickly followed by libourne, castillon, st. emilion,
and other strong places in the district. this was in the month of october,
1452. it was not until may of the following year that charles vii. decided
to risk the fortunes of war with the two armies which he had mustered--one
on the garonne, and the other on the charente. by that time the whole of
western guyenne was again english. the plan of campaign followed was
the one laid out by the long-headed jean bureau, a man of figures and
calculations--a small moltke of the fifteenth century. he had been the
king's treasurer, his _argentier_; then the bastard of orleans made him
mayor of bordeaux, and now, because he had a taste for guns, he was grand
master of the artillery. he advised charles that the best course to adopt
in order to spoil the english scheme would be to take possession of
the roads leading to bordeaux, and thus cut off communication with the
interior. now, castillon was an important strategical point, commanding
one of the principal gates of the bordelais, and it was resolved to make a
vigorous effort to snatch this fortress, which was but weakly garrisoned,
from the hands of the english. the army, which was under the nominal
command of the comte de penthievre, but whose ruling spirit was jean
bureau, accordingly marched on castillon, and the king's army moved in
the same direction. talbot, having tidings of the enemy's plans, hurried
eastward with all the forces he could muster to the relief of the garrison.
his main object, however, was probably to prevent a junction of the two
armies. he was confident of being able to defeat both if he could engage
them separately.

the french army came down the valley of the dordogne, and drew near to
castillon when talbot was still far away. the plan of the leaders was not
to attack the town until their camp had been well fortified with earthworks
and palisades, for it was felt that they could not be too cautious when an
adversary like talbot was in the country, and possibly near at hand. the
entrenched camp was laid out and ordered with a military science in
advance of the age. the position, moreover, was very judiciously chosen,
considering the impossibility in which the french were placed of selecting
high ground. the camp was in a fork formed by the dordogne and its small
tributary, the lidoire, which flows in a south-westerly direction, and
falls into the broad river a mile or two above castillon. bureau was given
ample time to raise his ramparts, dig his moats, fix his palisades, and
set up his park of artillery, on which he laid so much store. then were
detached 800 archers--angevins and berrichons--who took up their quarters
at an abbey that then existed a little to the north of the town, at the
foot of a wooded hill. the fortress was therefore threatened on two sides.

on july 16 talbot arrived on the scene, and at the first brush obtained a
signal advantage by taking the french completely by surprise. on the march
from libourne he did not trust himself to the broad valley, which, being
highly cultivated then as it is now, offered no cover, but followed the
line of hills to the north of it, on which much of the ancient forest still
clung. thus he managed to conceal his advance until his men broke suddenly
upon the unsuspecting archers of anjou and berry, and slaughtered them with
that thoroughness which was characteristic of mediaeval warfare. talbot
belonged to an age that gave no quarter and expected none. a man down was a
man lost, unless he had extraordinary luck. the massacre of these archers
put the english army--which, after the drafts made on various garrisons,
was now said to be about 6,000 strong--in good spirits. not many of the
fugitives reached the camp. talbot did not follow up this advantage by
attempting an immediate attack upon the fortified position in the plain. he
gave his men a rest after their toilsome march over rough ground, and
put off the decisive battle until the morrow. in the meantime, he placed
himself in communication with the garrison of castillon, and arranged that
a sortie in force should take place on the signal being given for the great
tug-of-war. he made the abbey his headquarters, and it has been recorded
that the casks of wine found in the cellars of the dispossessed monks were
speedily drained.

the momentous day of july 17 broke, and talbot was waiting to hear mass
before risking upon the die of a battle the english cause in aquitaine, so
wonderfully and bloodlessly redeemed in a few months. one of the last of
the mediaeval knights, the ardour of his loyalty was tinged with mysticism,
and any cause that he had espoused would have become holy in his eyes. he
therefore raised those aged eyes now to the god of battles as he knelt in
the quiet sanctuary, impatient though he was to see the vineyards and the
meadows redden again with the blood that he had been shedding with the zeal
of a crusader for more than half a century. his chaplain was laying
the altar, when a sudden movement of armed men disturbed the kneeling
octogenarian from his devotions. tidings were brought that the french camp
was breaking up in disorder, and that the enemy was about to escape. at
this news the blood of the old warrior began to rush through his veins, and
without waiting for the mass, he had his armour brought to him. clad in
iron and mounted upon his white horse, accompanied by his son, the lord
lisle--shakespeare's john talbot--he rode down into the plain. the enemy
was not in disorder, but was waiting behind the entrenchments for the
expected onslaught.

talbot gave the order for the attack, and his thousand knights and esquires
charged down upon the camp. when they were well within range of bureau's
artillery, the 'three hundred cast-iron pieces mounted on wheels, which
they called _bombardes_,' [footnote: chroniques de jean tarde.] broke into
a roar, and the stone balls worked terrible havoc upon horses and riders.
the ground was quickly strewn with heavily armoured men, who lay there as
helpless as turned turtles, and who were ridden over by those in the rear.
the mediaeval cavalry was shattered or thrown into hopeless confusion by
the new artillery. the infantry met with no better success in moving to the
assault of the hastily raised ramparts bristling with guns. the english
army was demoralized by this unexpected reception. in vain did talbot ride
again and again into the thickest of the fray--the besieged had now assumed
the offensive. even his grand old figure and his rallying cry failed to
turn back the tide of disaster. it has been written that in his wrath he
struck those of his own party who endeavoured to draw him out of the danger
to which he was constantly exposing himself. he felt that at his age it was
not worth while to survive defeat, in order that he might die in his bed
with a mind tortured by gnawing regret a few months or years later.

but although he resolved not to save himself, he urged his son to flee.
on this point there is too much agreement between english and french
chroniclers for it to be possible to doubt that shakespeare's well-known
scene between the old and the young talbot, in the first part of 'king
henry vi.,' was founded on fact. moreover, what was more natural than that
the father, when he saw the evil turn that things were taking, should have
said to his son:

  'therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse,
  and i'll direct thee how thou shall escape
  by sudden flight. come, dally not; be gone'?

what more natural, too, than that the son of such a father should have
replied in words which, although less rhythmical, would have been in
substance these?--

  'is my name talbot? and am i your son?
  and shall i fly?
  the world will say he is not talbot's blood,
  that basely fled when noble talbot stood.'

to the fact that the battle of castillon was fought in perigord, although
the town is in the bordelais, we doubtless owe the interesting description
that jean tarde has left us of the memorable struggle. his narrative, so
far as it relates to the incident between talbot and his son, is in the
main the same as shakespeare's; but being told in the plain prose of a
simple annalist, it lacks the rhetorical and romantic embellishments which
the british poet thought fit to add. in the following translation of the
most interesting part of tarde's description of the battle, an effort has
been made to preserve the style of the writer:

'the english troops entered courageously by the passage where the artillery
awaited them, which (passage) alone could give them access to the french
army. he who commanded the artillery took his time, and at the first
discharge laid low three or four hundred. this massacre, coming
unexpectedly, troubled the whole english army, and threw it into disorder,
which pained talbot to see; and fearing the defeat of his men, he told
the sieur de l'isle, his son, to withdraw and reserve himself for a more
fortunate occasion; who replied that he could not retire from the combat
in which he saw his father running the risk of his life. to this talbot
rejoined, 'i have in my life given so many proofs of my valour and military
virtue, that i cannot die to-day without honour, and i cannot flee without
making a breach in the reputation i have acquired by so much labour; but to
you, my son, who are bearing here your first arms, flight cannot bring any
infamy nor death much glory.' [footnote: 'j'ay pendant ma vie donne tant de
tesmoignages de ma valeur et vertu militaire que je ne puys meshuy mourir
sans honneur et ne puys fuir sans fere breche a la reputation que j'ay
acquise par tant de travaux; mais vous mon filz qui portes icy vos
premieres armes, la fuitte ne vous peut apporter aucune infamie, ny la mort
beaucoup de gloire.'] but without giving heed to this counsel, the young
lord, full of generous courage, reassured his men, made them fall again
into rank, and having ranged them with their bucklers fixed in tortoise
fashion, sped on to the attack of his enemies in their camp; for they had
not dared to leave their trenches. the french, seeing themselves pressed in
this way, entered into the battle. great was the _melee_. the artillery of
the french continued all the while to fire upon the english troops, and so
well that a stone striking talbot broke his thigh. the english seeing their
chief on the ground, believing him dead, and recognising that the french
were the stronger in artillery and in the number of men, lost courage, fell
into disorder, and only thought of saving themselves. the french, on the
contrary, took heart and fought with fury. the battle was bloody. talbot,
his son the sieur de l'isle, another bastard son, and a son-in-law, were
killed with the greater part of the english nobility, and the whole army
was cut to pieces. talbot's body was buried on the spot where it was found,
and upon his grave was built a small chapel that still exists, but open to
the sky and half ruined.'

jean tarde concludes his narrative of the battle with these remarks:

'the english army being thus defeated, castillon surrendered, and the king
in person besieged bordeaux, which surrendered on october 18. following its
example, all the other towns of guyenne again submitted to him. thus ended
the domination of the english in guyenne, of which (province) they were
completely dispossessed, and which at once returned to the sceptre and
crown of france, after remaining for three hundred years in the claws of
the english leopards.'

there are some patent inaccuracies in tarde's account--the statement, to
wit, that talbot was buried on the spot where he fell, whereas his body was
carried from the field and taken to england. the ecclesiastical chronicler
must have accepted the story in circulation among the common people, which
is repeated to this day by the peasants around castillon, who even point
out a mound which they call 'talbot's grave.' shakespeare does not fall
into this error, although he brings jeanne d'arc upon the battlefield,
notwithstanding that she was burnt twenty-two years before the death of
talbot.

according to the version accepted by french historians, talbot was
overthrown by a cannon-shot, and was afterwards despatched on the ground by
a soldier who ran his sword through the hero's throat. his body was carried
into the french camp, where it remained all night, and it was so disfigured
that his herald could hardly recognise it. many of the fugitives were
drowned or were killed by the archers while attempting to swim across the
dordogne. four thousand english, or english partisans, were said to have
been slain on this fatal day, and only a small remnant of the army managed
to retreat within the walls of castillon. the french then besieged the
town, and the bombardment was so furious that the garrison was soon willing
to surrender on the best terms that could be obtained. bordeaux was not
besieged until st. emilion, libourne, fronsac, bazas, cadillac, and other
strongholds of the bordelais had capitulated.

after this rather long journey into the past, i must return to my wayfaring
upon the battlefield of castillon, over which more than four centuries have
crept since the events occurred which gave it so dramatic a celebrity.

scorched by the now blazing sun, i took the shadeless road leading out of
the town towards the north-east, and after walking about a mile between
vineyards, i came to the commemorative monument of the battle raised in
1888 by the union patriotique de france. it is a low obelisk, with no
ornament save a mediaeval sword carved upon it, with point turned upwards.
facing the road is the following inscription:

  '_dans cette plaine le 17 juillet, 1453, fut remporte
  la victoire qui delivra du joug de l'angleterre
  les provinces meridionals de la france et termina la
  guerre de cent ans_.'

the abbey where the french archers were surprised and slain must have been
near this spot, but it was down in the valley by the lidoire where talbot
fell. there is no trace of a chapel such as that of which tarde speaks, nor
any other mark to show the place. but the little stream is there as of old,
and the beautiful dordogne that drank the mingled blood of the two armies
which its tributary poured into it flows serenely and blue as it did then
under the same summer sky.

an englishman who now wanders over the battlefield of castillon can hardly
realize how his country grieved at the defeat of talbot far away here
amidst the southern vines. to-day it seems so absurd, so contrary to the
policy of common-sense, that england, then so thinly populated, should have
striven so hard and so long in order to be a continental power; when now,
with her dense population, half subsisting upon foreign supplies, she
blesses that accident of nature which caused the bridge of rocks that
connected her with the mainland to disappear beneath the sea. surely if
history teaches anything, it teaches the vanity of politics.

from castillon i bent my course to st. emilion on the road to libourne; the
dordogne, which here twists like a snake in agony, being left somewhat to
the south. the whole country, hill and plain, was clad with vineyards, but
i soon grew weary of looking at the numberless short vines fastened to
stakes in one broad blaze of unchanging sunshine. even the hanging clusters
of grapes wearied the eye by endless repetition.

by-and-by, out of all this sameness rose a hill in that abrupt manner which
strikes a peculiar character into this southern landscape, and upon
the hill were jutting rocks and a broken mass of strangely-jumbled
masonry-roofs rising out of roofs, gables crushing gables, feudal towers,
great walls, and one tall heaven-pointing spire. this was st. emilion,
respected in the middle ages as a strong fortress of the bordelais, and now
so famous for its wine that the locality has long ceased to produce more
than an insignificant part of that which is put into bottles bearing the
name of a saint who drank nothing stronger than water. only the wine that
is grown upon the sides of the hill is really st. emilion; it changes as
soon as the vineyards reach the plain. it is then a _vin de plaine_, and is
no more like the other than if it had been grown fifty miles away.

celtic remains point to the conclusion that, long before the foundation of
the first monastery, which was the beginning of the mediaeval town, the
gauls had an _oppidum_ on this hill. st. emilion became a fortified town in
the reign of king john, who signed a charter here, and it may be said to
have been thoroughly gained over to the english cause by edward i., who
granted numerous privileges to the burghers. for a short time the place
fell into the power of philippe iv., but it was in its collegial church in
may, 1303, that the duchy of aquitaine was ceremoniously restored by the
seneschal of gascony to the king of england, represented on this occasion
by the earl of lincoln. to reward the inhabitants for their fidelity, and
to compensate them in some sort for the trials which they had endured in
consequence, st. emilion was made a royal english borough, and enjoyed the
special favour and protection of the sovereign.

it was in this fourteenth century that it rose to the height of its
importance and prosperity. we can gather to-day from the ruins of its
religious buildings and fortifications what that importance must have been.
besides the monastery dating from the age of charlemagne, whose monks early
in the twelfth century were placed under the rule of st. augustin,
two great religious establishments were those of the minor friars or
cordeliers, and the preaching friars or dominicans. of the vast convent of
these last nothing remains but a very stately and noble fragment of the
church wall, standing isolated on the top of the hill.

during the hundred years' war st. emilion was besieged and taken by du
guesclin; but although the burghers were often compelled to dissemble in
order to save their throats, they were always ready to welcome an english
army. they were among the first to follow the example of the men of
bordeaux, who raised the english flag for the last time in 1452.

during the religious wars of the sixteenth century st. emilion suffered
grievously from the fury and bestiality of the vile ruffians of both camps.
the excesses of the norman barbarians when they burnt and pillaged the
town in the ninth century were mild in comparison with those of the
sixteenth-century christians.

there are few spots more fascinating to the artist and archaeologist than
this ruinous old stronghold of the english kings. one might ramble a long
time over the cobble stones of its steep narrow streets, and about the
ruined ramparts draped with green pellitory and the spurred valerian's
purple flowers, with a mind held in continual tension by the picturesque.
at every angle there is a fresh surprise. the monolithic church, made by
excavating the calcareous rock, which crops out and forms a kind of table
near the top of the crescent-shaped hill, is said to have been mainly the
work of monks in the ninth century. there is no other resembling it, with
the exception of the one at aubeterre, the idea of which was probably
borrowed here. steps lead down into the nave, where there is an odour of
ancient death, and where the light darting through windows pierced in the
face of the cliff reveals on each side a row of huge rectangular piers
supporting round-headed arches, all forming part of the rock. these
separate the nave from the aisles, of which there are three, the one
farthest from the centre having been used chiefly for burial. all about are
numerous tomb recesses. the piers and their arches are covered with green
or black lichen, which adds not a little to the gloom and dismalness of
this subterranean church.

[illustration: monolithic church and detached tower at st. emilion.]

ornamental details of the exterior, such as the doorway with its has-relief
of the last judgment, are of a much later period than the rude excavations
of the interior. from the platform of rock immediately above the vast
crypt rise a gothic tower and spire dating from the twelfth century. this
structure, which lends so much character to st. emilion, appears to belong
to the church beneath; but such is not the case. although separated, it is
a part of the collegial, now parish, church, which is higher up the hill,
just within the line of the ramparts. it is said to have been built by the
english, but the romanesque lateral doorway would be strong evidence of
the contrary if there were no other. english influence, however, may have
played some part in the extensive rebuilding which was carried out in the
fourteenth century. the east end, scarcely forming an apse, and pierced in
the centre with a high broad window with a narrower window on each side,
suggests this, as do also the very massive columns of the choir.

close to the monolithic church is the cavern where the hermit emilion is
supposed to have dwelt. in order to see it, i had to find a little girl who
kept the key, and who led the way down the steps with a lighted candle. st.
emilion might have looked far before finding a more unpleasant place to
live in than this cavern. it might be safely guaranteed to kill in a very
short time any man with a modern constitution, unless he were miraculously
preserved from rheumatism and other evils of the flesh. the damp oozes
perpetually from the slimy rock, and the air is like that of a well.
indeed, there is a little well here called st. emilion's fountain. the
spring is intermittent; every two or three minutes the water is seen to
rise with one or more bubbles. it never fails, no matter how prolonged the
drought may be.

the little girl pointed out to me a great number of pins lying upon the
sandy bottom of the basin. i asked her how they came there, and she said
that they were dropped into the water by people--chiefly young girls--who
wished to know when they would be married. if two pins that had been
dropped in together crossed one another upon the bottom, it was a sign that
the person who let them fall would be married within a year. as i could
distinguish none that were crossed, i concluded that all who had made
the experiment here were condemned to celibacy. this form of
superstition--doubtless of celtic origin wherever met with--is much more
frequent in brittany than in guyenne.

close to the 'grotto' is an old charnel-house quarried in the rock with a
dome-shaped roof, at the top of which is a round hole that lets the light
of heaven into the awful pit. this opening formerly served another purpose.
there was a cemetery above, and as the bones were turned up from the
shallow soil to make room for others still clothed with their flesh, they
were thrown down the orifice. for those who did not wish to be disturbed
after death, the charnel-house was the securer place of burial. here, as in
the underground church, one sees numerous recesses in the wall which were
made for tombs. those who feel the need of sombre ideas will be as likely
to find the incentive to them here as anywhere. oh, what ghostly places are
these old southern towns, with their heaps of ruins, their churches as dim
as sepulchres, their crypts and charnel-houses filled with bones!

[illustration: convent of the cordeliers: the cloisters.]

fellow-wanderer, come and see with me the convent of the cordeliers. there
are no monks here now. since the revolution their habitation has been open
to all the winds of heaven, and the shadow of the wild fig-tree falls where
that of their own forms once fell as they stood in the stalls of their
chapel choir. in the cloisters, the ivy and the pellitory and the little
cranesbill have crept with the moss and the lichen from stone to stone, and
in the centre of the quadrangle stands a great walnut-tree that spreads its
branches and long leaves over all the grassy ground. birds that cannot
be seen sing aloft under the flaming sky; but here in the shadow of the
arcades and the dark foliage nothing moves except the snail and the lazy
toad at evening amidst the damp weeds. the stones that we see here in this
ruined convent bear testimony to the eternal restlessness of man's desire
to give some fresh artistic form to his religious aspiration. some were
carved in the romanesque period, others in the gothic, others in the
renaissance. witnesses of the human mind in different ages, all are
crumbling and growing green together, sharing a common fate.

among the many holes and corners full of curious interest at st. emilion,
but which have to be searched for by the visitor, is the cave where during
the reign of terror seven of the girondins sought refuge, and where they
remained hidden from their persecutors several months, notwithstanding
the unflagging efforts made to discover their retreat. their enemies were
convinced that they were somewhere in the town, or, rather, underneath the
town, for the rock on which it rests is honeycombed with quarries. these
girondins were guadet, salles, barbaroux, petlon, buzot, louvet, and
valady. guadet was a native of st. emilion, and he had a relative there
named madame bouquey. she and her husband were a brave and noble-minded
couple at a time when the craven-hearted--always the accomplices of
tyrants--were in the ascendancy everywhere. they sheltered guadet and his
companions in a cave under their garden. the fugitives had first thought of
hiding in the old quarries, but they realized that they would be much safer
in the cave.

hearing that the 'grotte des girondins' was in the garden of the school,
now kept by christian brothers, thither i went. a little boy in a long
black blouse, with a leather belt round his waist, having obtained the
permission, pulled open a trapdoor in the garden, and, candle in hand, led
the way down a flight of steps into a cavern, about the same size as st.
emilion's, but much dryer and more comfortable. on one side of it was an
opening, which was made perceptible by a very faint glimmer of daylight. i
found that this opening was in the side of a well. the water was still
far below, and the surface of the earth was about fifteen feet above. the
trap-door entrance--so the brothers assured me--did not exist in the
last century, and the only entrance to the cave was by the well. it was,
therefore, an admirable hiding-place, for the lateral opening was not
distinguishable from above, and anybody looking down and seeing the water
at the bottom would have thought it quite unnecessary to search any further
there. the girondins were let down by the rope, or they let themselves
down. as time went on, the position of monsieur and madame bouquey, on
whom strong suspicion rested, became more and more difficult; and when
the fugitives were informed that commissioners were on their way to st.
emilion, they resolved that, rather than expose their benefactors
to further peril, they would make an attempt to escape in different
directions. louvet got to paris, and was the only one of the seven who
did not come by a violent death. guadet and salles were captured at st.
emilion, and were executed, as a matter of course. barbaroux was also
taken, after making an unsuccessful attempt to blow out his brains, and he,
too, was guillotined at bordeaux. buzot and petion stabbed themselves in a
field between st. emilion and castillon, where their bodies were found
half eaten by wolves. the seventh, valady, was brought to the scaffold at
perigueux. monsieur and madame bouquey met the same fate. and it is with
this page of modern history that the quiet little garden of the brothers'
school, its well and hidden cavern, are so tragically associated.

near a ruinous _donjon_, called the chateau du roi, and attributed to louis
viii., now much overgrown with herbs and shrubs, i stood on a bastion of
the town wall, overlooking the crescent-shaped hollow, covered with houses,
bits of fortification older than the outer wall, ruined convents--a chaos
of lichen-tinted stones and tiles gilded by the warm yet tenderly softened
sunshine of early evening. and as i gazed, i longed the more to be able
to carry away a picture of that scene, with all its tones and tints, that
would last in the memory, as i also wished to draw out of it all the
meaning of what i felt. i left with a sense of failure, of weakness, of
confused impressions, which was to me like a gnawing weevil of the mind, on
the road to libourne.

vines, vines, nothing but vines, gradually shading down to the darkness of
the night that covers them. then, when the dusky gauze of the cloudless
night is drawn all over it, the broad leafy land sleeps under the sparkling
stars.

here at libourne i am in a town of whose english origin there can be no
doubt. it was one of the thirteenth-century _bastides_ founded in guyenne
by edward i. these _bastides_ were at the outset intended as places of
refuge for serfs and other non-belligerents of the rural districts in time
of war. their character was that of free or open towns, and most of the
burgs that still bear the name of villefranche in the south of france were
originally _bastides_. not a few of them keep the name of _la bastide_,
in combination with some other to this day. they are to be found all over
guyenne and a great part of languedoc. they were often fortified with a
wall, a palisade, and a moat. their strong peculiarity, however, the one
that has been preserved in spite of all the changes that centuries have
brought, was the rectilinear and geometrical manner in which they were laid
out. in contrast to the typical mediaeval town that grew up slowly around
some abbey, or at the foot of some strong castle that protected it, and in
the building of which, if any method was observed, it was that of making
the streets as crooked as possible, to assist the defenders in stopping the
inward rush of an enemy, the streets of the _bastide_ were all drawn at
right angles to each other. consequently, however old the houses may be,
such towns have somewhat of a modern air. for the same reason, one of the
chief attributes of the picturesque--an accidental meeting of various
motives--is absent. to the inhabitants of these free towns a certain
quantity of land was apportioned in equal parts, for which a fixed rent was
paid to the king or other feudal lord.

i have said that the _bastides_ were not picturesque. in their early days
they must have been quite hideous; but time, that plays havoc with human
beings, lends to such of their works as may offer to it the resistance of a
long, hard struggle an interest which becomes at length a beauty. there
is usually to be found in these towns the thirteenth-century _place_, or
square, which formed, as it were, the heart of the commune. along each of
the four sides is a gothic arcade, on which the first and all the higher
storeys of the houses rest. thus, there is a broad pavement completely
vaulted over on each side of the quadrilateral, where people can walk,
sheltered from the sun or rain, these old squares, wherever they are found,
are now always picturesque.

libourne, from being a small _bastide_, grew to such importance, on account
of its position on the right bank of the dordogne and the wine trade that
it was able to carry on by water, that it rivalled bordeaux before the
close of the english domination, and the question of making it the capital
and the seat of the prince of wales and aquitaine was seriously pondered.
to-day it preserves all the plainness of its line-and-rule origin; but it
has a few redeeming features, such as one side of its ancient square,
with broad pavement under gothic arches, a picturesque town-hall of the
sixteenth century, and a curious mediaeval tower, with machicolated
embattlements, now capped with a very tall and pointed roof, and known as
the tour de l'horloge. it is a remnant of the fourteenth-century ramparts.

the people of libourne were steadfast partisans of the english to the
last, and after 1453 they did not seek to distinguish themselves by their
resignation to the rule of the french kings. when in 1542 the insurrection
against the salt-tax, commencing at la rochelle, spread over saintonge and
the whole of western guyenne, the libournais threw themselves heartily into
the movement. when the time of repression came they were made to smart
sorely for their turbulent spirit. the place de l'hotel de ville, of which
one side remains very much as it was then, bristled with gibbets, and 150
persons were hanged in a single day. the man who had rung the tocsin that
called together the insurgents was suspended by the neck to the hammer of
the bell, as a warning to others not to ring it again unless they had a
better motive.

[illustration: tour de l'horloge at libourne.]

standing by the broad river, a little above the point where the isle is
falling into it, carrying down all manner of craft with the tide, i see at
a distance of a couple of miles or so towards the west the hill that is
known in history as le tertre de fronsac. there charlemagne built a castle,
of which nothing now remains. the hill owes its modern celebrity entirely
to its wine. it is not everybody who knows the virtue of the genuine
fronsac, especially that which was yielded by the old vines before the
phylloxera destroyed them, but most people are familiar with the brand.
but for this, the _tertre_ would long since have ceased to be famous,
notwithstanding charlemagne.

the hill has a strange appearance, for it rises abruptly from the river
bank in the midst of the plain. it did not tempt me to walk to it in the
scorching heat, but as a steamboat was going there, i paid two sous and
went on board. i had never been in such a cockle-shell of a steamer before.
it rocked and tumbled like a coracle, and spat and fumed and snorted like a
veritable devil composed of an engine, a couple of paddle-wheels, and a few
boards. helped by the tide that was pouring out, it went down stream at a
rate that was almost exciting, and in a few minutes i was landed at the
bottom of the famous hill. i made a conscientious attempt to reach the top,
but was stopped just where it began to grow interesting by a notice-board
that warned me, if i ventured any farther, i should be prosecuted and
heavily fined. such things are not often seen in france. vineyards are
generally open, but here they were fiercely protected with walls and fences
and notice-boards. the land was evidently very precious. i had wandered
into truly civilized country, where land and manners were too highly
cultivated to please me, and i again regretted the rocky wastefulness that
i had left behind me.

[illustration: the hill of fronsac.]

i turned back, and wandering about the village, which is a straggling one,
looked for the church, hoping that this at least would show something of
interest. not being able to find it, i asked a man to tell me the way to
it, and he, stopping, said:

'_l'eglise pour aller prier dedans?_'

what does he mean by asking me that? i thought. could there be a church at
fronsac that was not used for praying?

'yes, that is the kind of church i am looking for.' 'very good,' rejoined
the man. 'now i know what you want i can inform you. i put that question to
you because there are some people here called leglise.'

it was to the church _pour prier dedans_ that i went, not to mr. church.
originally romanesque, it has been pulled about and changed almost as much
as the tertre de fronsac, which i am sure i shall never wish to climb
again.




[illustration: no name]


by the garonne


i have reached--i need not say how--the south-eastern corner of the
bordelais, and am now at bazas in very hot september weather, i am not only
as warm as a lizard of the dusty roadside likes to be, but am hungry and
thirsty. i therefore cast about for an inn that looks both cool and capable
of giving a fair meal to a tired wanderer. my choice rests with one that
swings the sign of the white horse; for, to tell the truth, i have somewhat
of a superstitious belief in the luck that this emblem brings to the
traveller. i place it immediately after the golden lion, my favourite beast
on a signboard, although it deceived me once. the deception, however,
befell in the bordelais, where the inhabitants are far from being the
most pleasant to be found in france; therefore i judged this _lion d'or_
charitably, and took account of all that might have frustrated its good
intentions.

having made up my mind to trust myself to the white horse, i entered a
large, _salle-a-manger_, which, after the glare of the mid-day sunshine,
seemed as dark as a cellar that is lighted by a small air-hole. the
shutters had been closed against the heat and the flies, but the rays that
broke through had the ardour and brilliancy cast by molten metal in a
smelting-house, and the sight very quickly accepted with relief the
lessened light of the room. there was one other person present, and,
although the table was long enough to accommodate fifty, my plate was set
immediately opposite his. he was a young negro gentleman, with such a
shining ebony skin that he was almost refreshing to eyes that had just left
the dazzling whiteness of the outer world. he gave me the impression of
being a rather conceited african, but this may have been because my dress
compared so unfavourably with his. he was the son of a merchant at st.
louis in senegal, and was just like a frenchman in all but his colour. i
asked him if he found the weather we were having sufficiently warm, and he
replied:

'_regardez comme je sue!_'

true enough, the beads of perspiration glistened upon his forehead like
black pearls. what is the use, i thought, of being an african if one cannot
keep dry in a temperature of 95 deg. fahrenheit?

i soon left my dark acquaintance, and went forth to roam about bazas,
which, like so many little old towns of southern france, is in the early
hours of a summer afternoon as quiet and deserted as a cemetery. the stones
are so heated that a cat that begins to cross the road lazily, stopping to
stretch or examine something in the gutter, will suddenly start off at a
rush as if a devil had been cast into it.

the interest of bazas to the traveller lies mainly in its church, which
was formerly a cathedral. its broad and imposing facade, encrusted with
ornament, chiefly in the florid gothic of the fifteenth century, but
disfigured by a hideous eighteenth-century _fronton_ that crowns the gable,
stands at the top of a broad and rather steep _place_, of which some of
the houses are of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. the tower built
against the northern end of the front carries a lofty and graceful
crocketed spire. until the revolution, this west front, ornamented as it
was with nearly three hundred statues, was considered the most elaborately
decorated in the south of france. even now, although so many of the niches
are vacant, it is exceedingly rich in sculpture. the central doorway is so
lofty that it occupies more than half the height of the original facade,
and the doorway on each side of it is only a little lower. the central
tympanum is divided into five compartments filled with figures in relief.
the uppermost panel represents the last judgment. the interior admirably
combines grandeur and lightness. the nave (without transept) is very long
and lofty, and, together with its clerestory, is beautifully proportioned.
finally, the effect of a delightful vista is obtained by the wide
sanctuary. with its lofty and airy arcade separating it from the
_pourlour_.

[illustration: bazas.]

all the old part of the town is built upon a rocky hill, and it is still
almost surrounded by ruinous ramparts. the church is just within the wall
on the side where the rock is precipitous. looking upward from the bottom
of the narrow valley, the view of the ramparts high overhead, tapestried
with ivy and other plants, and above these the tabernacle work, the
crocketed pinnacles and spire, and the fantastic far-stretching gargoyles
of the venerable cathedral, makes one feel that joy of the eye and the
spirit which is the wanderer's reward for all the sun-scorch and other
petty tribulations he may have to endure in searching for the picturesque.

from bazas i made my way to villandraut, a neighbouring town of about 1,000
inhabitants. i had left the vines, and was now in the _landes_ of the
gironde. i was surrounded by pines, gorse, and bracken, which last was as
brown as if it had been baked in an oven. ten summers had nearly passed
since i undertook my long walk through the great pine forests of the
landes. i had wandered on and on, and was again drawing near to them.
already the country wore much the same appearance as that farther south,
although less wild and desolate. i expected to have a return of the old
feelings when i found myself again in the midst of the pines that said so
much to me years ago; but somehow the old spirit would not come back, and i
felt little besides the heat and the weariness of the way.

villandraut, ordinarily a very dull place, was exceedingly animated when
i walked into it. a fair was being held there, and a fair in a village or
rural town is always a reason for being gay, and often an excuse for worse.
there was some local colour here. all the young girls wore the bordelaise
coiffure, the handkerchief being generally of white, yellow, green, or
crimson silk. just clinging to the back of a young head, no coif is more
graceful or picturesque than this. there was much dancing. cheeks flushed
and dark eyes flashed as the brilliant coifs and light-coloured dresses
whirled round and round. i found more feminine beauty in this south-eastern
corner of the bordelais than i had seen for a very long time among the
french peasants. the young women here are well and delicately formed,
and have an erect and graceful carriage. they are coquettes from their
childhood. they have fine eyes and luxuriant tresses, and the face often
shows richness of colour. a few _blondes_ are seen among the _brunes_; but
whether fair or dark they have all the same exuberance of nature. the teeth
are rarely good after early youth. the cause of this blemish is said to be
the water, which, passing through a sandy soil, contains little or no lime.

my motive in coming to this place was to see the ruined castle of
villandraut, the gloomy stronghold built at the commencement of the
fourteenth century by bertrand de goth (or got), archbishop of bordeaux,
who afterwards as pope clement v. took the momentous step of transferring
the papal see from rome to avignon. i found it a little outside the burg,
but near enough to be used by many of the peasants who had come into the
fair as a convenient place for putting up their carts and stabling their
animals. each of the towers had been turned into a stable for horses and
oxen, and scattered over the weedy space within the walls were vehicles of
all sorts and sizes.

the plan of the castle is a vast oblong, with a high cylindrical tower at
each angle, and two additional towers on the side of the town. the deep and
wide moat that still surrounds it, except where it has been filled up in
front of the gateway from which the drawbridge was once raised and lowered,
is like a ravine that is choked with brambles and shrubs. the exterior view
is very striking. it is impossible to approach this ruin without being
impressed by its mournful grandeur. from all these piled-up stones which
the wild plants strive to cover, there comes the sentiment of pride in
death. a very slow but a certain death it is. one after another the stones
will continue to fall as they have been falling for centuries, and will be
put to fresh uses. how many houses and pigsties at villandraut have been
built with materials taken from the castle? nobody knows exactly, but
everybody in the place has a shrewd suspicion on the subject. i climbed up
the dilapidated spiral staircase of one of the towers, and after passing
through two guard-rooms with gothic vaulting, where the wind, now blowing
up for storm, moaned through the loopholes, i came out upon the _chemin de
ronde_, quite overgrown with shrubs and ivy. all around stretched the pine
forest, with tints of violet and the purple rose deepening in the misty
distance.

[illustration: interior of the chateau de villandraut.]

this bastille on the edge of the sandy desert was a queer sort of fold for
a shepherd to build. to judge the past, however, by the present is one of
the most mischievous of errors. nothing is easier than to criticise the
actions of men in a bygone age, and nothing is more difficult than to do
justice to their motives. the militant bishop is intolerable now even, when
he is nothing more formidable than a controversialist. it may have been
necessary, however, in the middle ages for him to make himself dreaded as
well as respected, like the judges of israel. this clement v., at any rate,
must have believed in the need of the church to be able to defend itself
behind strong walls.

from villandraut i turned towards the garonne. a furious storm was now
raging southward, and after nightfall the lightning flashes kept the whole
forest seemingly ablaze. the hour was late when i reached the town of
langon by the river, and at the inn where i put up i met with a cold dinner
as well as a cold reception.

when the sun came again i took the road to st. macaire, and this soon
crossed the garonne. the broad blue river was very beautiful in the early
morning sunshine, and a mild lustre lay over the vine-clad plain beyond.
the vintagers were getting busy. bullock-waggons were waiting with the
barrels, now empty, that were to bear the grapes to the wine-press, and
here and there amidst the green of the motionless leaves was the gleam of
a white, yellow, or crimson coif that moved with the head of the woman or
girl who wore it.

[illustration: the garonne.]

the morning had not lost its freshness when i reached st. macaire. this is
one of those ruinous old towns of the bordelais where the traveller, if
he were an artist, would find a thrilling subject for his pencil at every
street corner, and at the angle of every bastion of crumbling rampart,
where the bramble, the ivy, and the wild fig-tree strike their roots
between the gaping stones. proud and strong in the centuries that have been
left far behind, st. macaire is now a little spot of slow life in the midst
of a wilderness of ruins. three walls encircled it, and although these did
long service as the quarries wherefrom the inhabitants drew such building
stone as they needed, yet have they not been demolished, but tell their
whole story still, in spite of wide gaps and breaks--ay, and with a far
more soul-moving voice than when they could show to the enemy their
crenated parapets without a flaw, when not a stone was wanting to any tower
or gateway, and when the twang of the cross-bow might have been heard from
every loophole. there are heaps of stones where the lizard runs, where the
coiled snake basks untroubled, where the dwarfed fig-tree sprouts when the
spring has come, and where the wild cucumber pushes forward its yellow
flowers that fear not the flame of summer. the fig-tree may also be seen
hanging from high walls, and the vine rambles among blooming or embrowned
wallflowers on the top of ruinous gateways, through which the people still
enter and leave the town as they did centuries ago.

the spirit of originality that animated the mediaeval architects in
this part of france, and which has given to so many churches a distinct
character, an individual expression, that keeps the interest of the
traveller constantly alive, is strongly marked upon the church of st.
macaire. commenced at the beginning of the twelfth century, its earliest
portions show the pointed style in its infancy, fearful as yet of
committing what seemed so like heresy--a departure from the roman arch; but
in the same building a much bolder gothic asserts itself in the parts that
were added in the thirteenth century. the west front and doorway have not
the majesty of the style as it was developed chiefly in the north, but they
have that venerable air which is not always to be found in the stately and
majestic. the low tympanum is crowded with figures belonging to the period
when the statuary's art was still swathed in the swaddling clothes of its
new infancy, and what with their own uncouthness, and the wear and tear of
time, it is no easy matter now to trace in them all the purpose and meaning
of the sculptor.

and yet in their blurred and battered state they tell us much more than
they would if they had been restored with the best skill and learning of
our own time. the age is gone when these bas-reliefs were the religious
books of the people. to imitate them is mere aestheticism, and to restore
them is often destruction.

a few words must be said of the old market-place of st. macaire. thanks to
the poverty or the apathy of the commune, three sides have retained all
their mediaeval character, the interest of which has been refined and
deepened by the artistic touch of time, the sentimental ravisher, the slow
and gentle destroyer. a gothic arcade encloses a wide pavement, and each
bay, with its vaulting, forms, as it were, the portico of the house, whose
first and higher storeys rest upon it. here those who are interested in
civic architecture can see thirteenth and fourteenth century houses still
retaining their wide gothic doorways.

i rested awhile in a cafe, and chance led me to one that was kept by an
englishman. he recognised my nationality, while i supposed him to be a
frenchman, and he seemed as glad to see me as if i had been an old friend.
he told me that when he was a boy his father brought his family from
england to les eyzies, where he was employed at the iron works. (the
smelting furnace has been cold for many a year.) the man who spoke was
middle-aged, and although he expressed himself with difficulty in english,
and turned his phrases out of french moulds of thought, he had kept a
strong accent of the midland counties. the tenacity with which an accent
adheres to the tongue, even when the language to which it belongs has
been half lost, is very remarkable. i remember meeting in my roamings an
englishwoman who had married a french cobbler, and who had been buried
alive with him in the haut-quercy for forty years. she had learnt to speak
patois like a native, but it had become a sore trial to her to put her
thoughts into english words; nevertheless, when she did bring out those
words that had been so long put away in the mind's lumber-room, the accent
was as pure cockney as if she had but lately drifted away from her own
middlesex.

the freshness of the morning was gone, and even in the shade of the cafe
i felt the hot breath of the day. when i was again upon the powdered road
between interminable rows of vines, the glare was dazzling; but i was not
alone. groups of people were trudging under the same fiery sky, and upon
the same dusty road, and all were moving in the same direction. when i
learnt that they were pilgrims on their way to verdelais, i thought that i
might do worse than be a pilgrim, too. i therefore went with the stream,
which soon turned up the flanks of the vine-clad hills.

thus i found myself about noon in a small village, seemingly composed of
one wide street lined on both sides with cafes and restaurants. there was
also a very conspicuous modern church in a fantastic and debased, but
showy, style of architecture. it was densely crowded, and the shine of
innumerable candles was seen through the open doors. the whole street
was likewise crowded with people, who had come from various parts of the
bordelais, and who seemed determined to spend a happy day in a sense no
less material than spiritual. there was a great rush to the restaurants,
and there was flagrant overcharging on the part of those who kept them--all
speculators on piety.

perhaps the grandeur of the solitude of roc-amadour, the antiquity of the
buildings, and the simplicity of the pilgrims had made me a wrong-headed
judge of the newer places of pilgrimage. however this may be, after the
first glance at verdelais i wished i had not come. there was no quiet
corner here where a wayfarer could sit and refresh himself; in this
hurly-burly of eager hunger, and with this infernal clatter of tongues,
repose was impossible.

after lunching in the midst of a noisy and vulgar throng, i regained the
open country, with the conviction that, should i ever decide to start off
upon a serious pilgrimage, the road to verdelais would not be the one that
i would take.

i now turned down towards the valley through the vines, the inevitable
vines, and was soon on the banks of the garonne. almost facing me upon the
opposite hillsides were the famous vineyards of sauterne, and i knew
that the vintagers were busy there, every woman--women are chiefly
employed--with her pair of scissors snipping off the grapes one by one from
the gathered bunches, and rejecting all that were not sound. it is a costly
method, but the wine pays for it.

a steamer comes panting down the river, and stops near the grove of willows
where i have been trying to hide myself from the all-searching, all-burning
sun. i go on board and take a delicious rest under an awning for two or
three hours, while the vine-covered hills on either side glide backward
with their many steeples and towers.

i left the steamer at a place called castres, some fifteen miles below
bordeaux. my motive for stopping here was to see the castle where
montesquieu was born, and where he spent the greater part of his life.
the map told me that it lay some five or six miles from castres in the
direction of the _landes_, and as the day was already far spent, i reckoned
upon passing the night at the small town of la brede, which is very near
the castle. the sun's rays were as yet but little calmed as i turned from
the broad, blue river.

i had to follow the highway, on which the white dust lay thick. this road
was carried up the hills. in the vineyards were crowds of men and women,
many of whom had been drawn out of the slums of bordeaux. some of them were
forlorn-looking beings, whose faces told that they were glad to seize this
opportunity of earning for a few days a sure wage. those who wish to feel
the poetic charm of the vintage should not go into the district of bordeaux
to seek it. here only the legend remains. it is not that the vines are
wanting. the bordelais, except in the sandy and pine-covered region of the
_landes_, has again become one immense vineyard; but whether it be from the
struggle to live, or the lust of prosperity, the people fail to impress the
traveller with that communicative openness and joyousness of soul which he
would like to find in them, if only that he might not have the vexation of
convicting himself of laying up for his own fancy another disillusion.

although the hills were not steep, the long ascent was wearisome in the
sultry air that no breath of wind freshened. at length the sun went down in
a golden haze, where the vine-leaves spread to the horizon like the sea.
then i descended the other side of the range of hills that follows the line
of the river. the vineyards gradually fell away, and scattered pines gave a
touch of sadness to the darkening land. by these signs i knew that i was on
the outskirts of the _landes_ of the gironde. but the sand was still some
miles away, and the country here was well cultivated. a church spire that
looked very high in the clear obscure, as i saw it through an opening of
trees, led me to la brede.

here i thought i should have no difficulty in finding night quarters, for
there was at least one good inn, which in its own estimation was a hotel.
but the way in which i was scrutinized when i wearily set down my knapsack
on an outside table and took a seat under the plane-trees told me that i
was not welcome. since i had been in the bordelais i had become rather too
familiar with such signs. the hotel-keepers here have but very slight faith
in the respectability of travellers who do not come in the usual way--that
is to say, by train or omnibus, or something with wheels, though it be but
a bicycle. to them the walking traveller, whether he carries a bundle over
his shoulder on a stick, or a knapsack on his back (the latter is very
rarely seen), is merely a tramp. if he speaks with a foreign accent, he is
doubly deserving of suspicion. these people of the gironde are, perhaps,
all the more doubtful of the morality of others because of the little
confidence that they are able to place in their own.

my request for a room at this inn was not refused immediately. there was
a consultation indoors, the result of which was that i was presently told
that every room was already engaged. there was nothing for it but to walk
on to the next inn, and hope for better luck there. it would seem as if
they had been prepared here for my coming, and had already made up their
minds how to act. two women stood in the doorway, and did not move an inch
to make way for me. i had hardly asked the question about the room, when
the answer came emphatically 'no.' at the next house to which i went i met
with the same answer; but in spite of the unpleasantness of my position, i
was almost thankful for it, such a villainous-looking place it was. there
now remained but one small auberge at la brede. if i was denied shelter
there, i should have to go to bordeaux that night, and i was five miles
from the nearest railway-station. the prospect had become sombre, and i
began to regret that i had allowed the chateau de montesquieu to entice me
among these too civilized savages.

the last inn was a little outside the town. a dark man, whose face, even in
the feeble light, i could see was deadly pale, was seated outside the door,
breathing the freshness that now began to be felt in the evening air. as my
previous negotiations had been with women, i was glad to perceive now an
innkeeper of the other sex. my experience of the french provinces had
taught me that, wherever people are suspicious of strangers whose
appearance is not such as they are familiar with, and where the measure of
prosperity has been sufficient to produce a cautious disinclination to move
out of the daily trodden track, it is far better to deal with men than with
women.

the pale-faced man, after looking at me fixedly for a few seconds, said:

'yes, i have one spare room, and it is at your service.'

i crossed the threshold, and took a seat in the kitchen and general room.
the surroundings were not very cheerful; but no other people would have
anything to do with me, and therefore my choice of accommodation had to be
what is termed hobson's. after all, it would not be the first time that i
had passed the night in a little roadside inn.

the pale man's wife did not look in a very sweet temper at her husband for
having put extra work upon her without consulting her, and there was an
exceedingly obnoxious boy of about fourteen who sat upon the corner of
a table and, with the assurance of a mounted gendarme, put all sorts of
questions to me in a voice that would change suddenly from a bark to a
bleat. i was seized with such a longing to knock him off his perch that i
presently kept my eyes fixed upon the frying-pan so that i might not be
tempted beyond my strength. the father was evidently too weak to contend
with his horrible offspring. my interest in the man was at once awakened.
he told me that he was from the lot-et-garonne, where he owned land, and
had been a tobacco-planter, until a disease of the spinal marrow compelled
him to seek an occupation that required less exertion. thus he came to be
an innkeeper. he had spent much money upon doctors, who had done him little
or no good. the only treatment that had given him any relief was _la
pendaison_.

'hanging!'

'yes, hanging. i have passed hours hung up by the neck.'

then he explained the apparatus that is used for stretching the spinal
marrow in this manner, and how it differs from the method of hanging that
is best known in england. when i learnt what he had undergone in order to
get cured, i could understand why he looked so pale and sad. a melancholy
jacques was he, indeed, in appearance, and he was certainly not the most
cheerful of hosts whom one might hope to find at the end of a weary day;
but i knew that i was in the house of an honest man, who was also brave and
patient, while he looked out upon the world through darkening windows.

before going to bed i had some talk with my host about my adventures at la
brede before i applied to him for a night's lodging. there was actually a
sparkle of mirth in his melancholy dark eyes, and his sunken cheeks were
puckered up with a sort of smile.

'if you had been dressed in a black coat,' said he, 'like a _commis
voyageur_, they would have all found room for you.'

this was my opinion, too. the bordelais believe in the respectability of no
travelling motives under heaven that are not commercial.

my bedroom that night had much the character of an outhouse or fowlhouse.
it was on the ground-floor, and the rafters overhead sloped rapidly towards
the exterior wall. a small low window opened upon the garden. the walls
were white-washed, but the floors were very black, as all these southern
floors are. upon the single table a heap of raw wool waiting to be spun had
been pushed back a little to make room for the doll's washing-basin and
towel that had been placed there for me. besides the bed that had been
prepared for me, there was another, which happily was to remain unoccupied
that night. the traveller should always be thankful when he has a room,
however poor and plain, that for the few hours which he needs for rest he
can call his own. if he snores himself, he will sleep through the noise,
and have, perhaps, pleasant dreams; but if anybody else snores in the same
room, he may lie awake with clenched fists, and be tortured by the foolish
desire to throw something.

the next morning i believe i was the earliest visitor who in modern times
has troubled the serenity of the chateau de la brede. a mist--one of the
first of the falling year--lay white and dense upon the land. it was a
fine-weather mist, such as in the opinion of the wine-grower helps to ripen
the grapes.

i had entered the park about half a mile beyond the town, and then between
two rolling banks of vapour i saw the high walls and higher towers of the
castle looming through the grayness. a little later i distinguished the
dull water of the very wide moat, and the three connected bridges, which
were formerly blank spaces between low towers, unless the drawbridges
happened to be let down.

[illustration: chateau de montesquieu.]

over these the visitor must now pass in order to reach the castle. as i was
so early, i killed time to my own good by trying to fix some impressions of
the vast pile of masonry that stood here in the middle of a little lake.
it is an extraordinary block of architectural patchwork, quite without
symmetry, and yet the mass is imposing. the ground-plan approaches the
circle more than any other geometrical figure, but it is a circle with
slices cut off, and composed of angles so irregular as almost to imply
a fantastic motive. but the motive was purely utilitarian. the feudal
fortress which was built here in the thirteenth century underwent in
subsequent ages so many modifications and additions with a view more to the
comfort of the dwellers therein than to their protection from enemies, that
in course of time little of the mediaeval buildings remained besides the
great hall, the basement, and the keep. these became jumbled up with late
gothic and renaissance work.

jean de secondat, who purchased the old fortified manor-house out of his
savings as _maitre d'hotel_ to antoine de bourbon and jeanne d'albret, was
probably responsible for most of the sixteenth-century work that one
now sees. when his descendant, charles de secondat de montesquieu, took
possession, the building was almost identical with that which exists
to-day. it has been exceptionally favoured, for it has remained in the
family, and for at least two hundred years it has undergone none of those
alterations which in previous times had so changed its appearance. the eye
may not be delighted with its symmetry, but the mind has the satisfaction
of knowing that this was verily the birthplace and home of him who more
than any other man made political science popular.

the present owner of the castle, recognising the duty that the descendant
of a great man owes to society, receives with the most liberal courtesy all
those who make a pilgrimage to this spot.

the relics of montesquieu are numerous, and they have been preserved with
admirable solicitude. the room where he slept and wrote is almost the
same as when he finally left it; with this difference, that time has made
everything look dingier. even the white linen curtains which hung at the
window hang there still, and they are by no means so yellow as one might
expect them to be. on the plain little table at which he washed himself
stand his basin and ewer. the basin would be called to-day a dish, for it
is not more than two inches deep. it held quite enough water, however, to
serve for the ablutions of a baron a century and a half ago. much the same
notion of what is fit and proper in a washingbasin remains to this day
among the french peasantry, and even among the middle class in the
provinces the growth of the toilet crockery has been far from rapid since
the time of montesquieu.

the bed in which the political philosopher slept is a broad four-poster,
not with slender and finely carved posts, like fenelon's, but severely
simple. indeed, in none of the furniture of this room is there any
indication of the love of the ornamental. on the contrary, everything
tells of a mind that set no value upon aught but the strictly needful.
montesquieu's small writing-case, divided into compartments, the borders
of the leather covering embellished with dingy, half-obliterated gold
ornament, was perhaps the finest bit of property he had before his eyes
as he sat and worked there. he always carried it about with him when he
travelled. no doubt it went with him to england, and he probably wrote
letters to his friend lord chesterfield upon it. and here is his travelling
trunk. it still looks fit to bear many years' rough usage; and yet, if
railway porters had to pull it about, they would not know whether to laugh
at its strange appearance or to swear at its weight. it was built for wear,
like noah's ark, and it is entirely covered with leather, elaborately
decorated with patterns, composed of the round heads of small nails. the
high stone chimney-piece, plain and solid like the character of the man
who did so much lasting work in this room, remains, together with the
fire-dogs, as it was in his time.

montesquieu formed the habit when thinking alone of leaning back in his
chair before the hearth and resting his feet against one of the jambs of
the chimney-piece. the stone was much worn away by his feet; but the
marks would pass unobserved if the knowledge of their cause had not been
preserved in the family. a bust of montesquieu made in his life-time shows
him with closely-cropped hair, and without a wig. it is a remarkably
caesar-like head, every feature indicating the decision and positivism of
the roman character--such a one, indeed, as ideally became the author of
the 'considerations.' but how the face is altered when we look at it in
another portrait--a painted one, representing the writer in a great wig as
president of the parliament of guyenne! a head becomes another head if the
coiffure be but changed.

a little room adjoining this one was where montesquieu's secretary worked.
he was the drudge of a literary man, who was probably not exempt from the
constitutional irritability of those who carry a whirling grindstone within
their brains for the sharpening and polishing of thought. the unremembered
scribe may have done good service to literature while undergoing his
purgatory in this world.

distributed throughout this suite of apartments on the ground-floor is much
furniture of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, most of
which was here when montesquieu was _chatelain_.

a spiral staircase leads to the great hall of the old castle. it has
been very carefully preserved, and although the walls are now lined with
book-shelves, it keeps the air of baronial grandeur and simplicity.
montesquieu made it his library, and had reading-desks set up all down the
middle. his books remain, as well as some of his manuscripts, including
that of 'les lettres persanes.' this long hall is covered by a plain
barrel-vault, and at the far end is an immense chimney-place, the chimney
built out at the base several feet from the line of the wall, and sloping
back towards the ceiling. on the plain (not conical) surface of this
mediaeval chimney are painted figures, said to be of the thirteenth
century, but probably later. one can distinguish a king, a cardinal, and a
page on horseback. the mediaeval fireplates are still in their old place at
the back of the vast hearth.

i have little more to add to this story of my wanderings. from la brede
i went to bordeaux, where i found much to admire that i had not noticed
before. the architecture of this city is incomparably richer than that of
paris by the diversity of style and the good fortune that has protected so
many of the buildings from the destructive influences of war, fanaticism,
and the presumption of those who in all ages would abolish the past if they
could, and refashion the world according to their own ideas. the roman
period is only represented by a fragment of the amphitheatre, now called
the palais gallien. but what a picturesque fragment this is, and how well
it introduces the visitor to the study of the romanesque, the gothic,
and the renaissance buildings, of which he will find such characteristic
examples here! the interest of the englishman will be increased by the
knowledge that some of the most notable of the gothic edifices were raised
when to his countrymen bordeaux was a continental london, and a well-known
tendency of his will probably lead him to attribute much of their grave
stateliness to the influence of the anglo-saxon character.

[illustration: the garonne at bordeaux.]

the people of bordeaux are supposed to have derived not a little of their
keen commercial spirit from the english. if this be so, they may take
credit for having in some respects surpassed their teachers. by the gift
of persuasiveness and the abundance of words, by aplomb, combined with
astuteness, they are fitted by nature to be the most successful traffickers
on earth. but in return for a little work they expect a great deal of
enjoyment, and more than most industrious cities is bordeaux given up to
the worship of pleasure.

[illustration: the palais callien at bordeaux.]

from bordeaux i continued down the river until i saw the dordogne join the
garonne, where both are lost in the gironde. here the two beautiful and
noble streams, one flowing from the auvergne mountains, and the other from
the pyrenees, no sooner embrace than they die on the breast of the salt
wave. they and their tributaries caused one of the sternest, and yet one
of the most smiling, of regions--a country where nature seems to have the
passion of contrast, and where she brings forth all the best fruits of
the earth--to be named by the celts the land of waters, and by the romans
aquitania. a little reflection explains why the english of the middle ages,
having once possessed it, should have clung to it with such tenacity. less
easy is it to understand why so few of their descendants of to-day feel the
peculiar spell that almost every rood of this broad land should cast upon
them, apart from the charm of old story and of the picturesque that appeals
to all.

[illustration: map showing the itinerary of 'two summers in guyenne' and
'wanderings by southern waters']

index.

agriculture in the correze,
  in perigord,
albigenses, the,
ales,
angelus, the,
angling,
architecture:
  byzantine,
  gothic,
  renaissance,
  roman,
  romanesque,
argentat,
arnaud (arnaud daniel, troubadour),
artaud, the (river),
aspic, the,
aubeterre,
aulaye, st.,
auvergnats, descent of the,

barthelemy, st.,
bastides,
bazas,
bazile, st.,
beaulieu,
beuene, valley of the,
beynac,
boetie, etienne de la,
boleti,
bordeaux,
bordelaises,
born, bertrand de,
bort,
bourdeilles,
brantome,
  abbey of,
  pierre de bourdeilles,
brede (la),
buckwheat,
buisson (le),
bureau, jean,

_cacolets_,
cadouin, abbey of,
cadurci, the,
caesar at uxeliodunum,
carthusians of vauclair,
castillon,
  battle of,
castres (gironde),
cazoules,
cemeteries, rural,
ceou, the (river),
cepes,
chandos,
chateau d'aubeterre,
  de beynac,
  de biron,
  de bourdeilles,
  des eyzies
  de fages,
  de fenelon,
  de grignols (talleyrand),
  de gurcons,
  de hautefort,
  de marouette,
  de montaigne,
  de montesquieu,
  de nabinaud,
  de villandraut,
chavannon, gorge of the,
christy, mr.,
clement v., pope,
coiffure at mont-dore,
  in the bordelais,
  in the correze,
  in perigord,
coligny,
conde, madame de,
court-mantel, henry,
coutras,
coux,
crayfish,
cyprien, st.,

denis, st.,
domme,
dordogne, valley of the,
double, the,
dovecots,
_droit seigneurial,_
dronne, valley of the,

echourgnac,
eglisottes, les,
eleanor of aquitaine,
emilion, st.,
english, the, at bordeaux,
  at castillon,
  at domme,
  at les eyzies,
  at libourne,
  at martel,
  at montpont,
  at st. emilion,
  at st. cyprien,
  at sarlat,
  at tayac,
eyquem. _see_ montaigne
eyzies, les,

fage, la,
fenelon,
frogs,
fronsac,
front, st., cathedral of,
funeral customs,

gallien, le palais,
garonne, valley of the,
gipsies,
gironde, the (river),
girondins, the,
gorge of hell, the,
goth, bertrand de,
grand-brassac,
grolejac,
guyenne, english rule in,

hautefort,
huguenots,

ilex, the,
implements, flint,
isle, valley of the,

jongleur, the modern,

knolles, robert,

landes (of the gironde),
langon,
laplau,
leaguers, the,
leopard, the english (heraldic),
libourne,
limeuil,
lisle,
  the lord,
luxege, the (river),

macaire, st.,
madeleine, la,
malaria,
man, prehistoric,
marcillac,
martel,
  charles,
master and servant,
mere, poltrot de,
messeix,
metayage,
michel-bonnefare, st.,
miremont, cavern of,
modieres,
mondane, st.,
montaigne, michel,
montesquieu,
montpont,
mothe-montravel, la,
moustier, le,
nabinaud,
neuvic,
normans, the, in perigord,

orgues de bort,
oriel, the golden,
owls,

pantaleon, st,
peasant-proprietor, the,
perigord noir,
perigueux,
plantagenet, henry,
plateau, great central, of france,
plough, ancient form of,
poaching,
politics, local,
port-dieu,
puy d'issolu,

raymond ii., viscount of turenne,
religious customs,
riberac,
roche canillac, la,
  chalais, la,
romance language, the,
roque-gageac, la,
rue, the (river),

salignac, francois de. _see_ fenelon,
sarlat,
saut de la saule, le,
sauterne, the vintage at,
sauve, st.,
savennes,
sebastien, dom,
secondat, charles de. _see_ montesquieu,
servieres,
shroud, the holy,
siorac,
snail-eaters,
songs of perigord,
souillac,
spinning-wheels,
superstition,

taillefer,
talbot,
tarde, jean,
tayac, la roque de,
  church of,
tocane st. apre,
tocsin, the,
tour de mareuil,
  de vesone,
trappists,
troglodytes,
truffles,
turenne,
tursac,

uxellodunum,
vauclaire, la chartreuse de,
vayrac,
verdelais,
verere, valley of the,
victor, st.,
villandraut,
villefranche de longchapt,
villeinage,
vin de plaine,
vins du pays,
vintage, the, in the bordelais,
viper, the red,

wages,
wolves,


the end.





end of project gutenberg's two summers in guyenne, by edward harrison barker
