
part second. [continued.]


chapter x.

italian wars.--partition of naples.--gonsalvo overruns calabria.

1498-1502.

louis xii.'s designs on italy.--alarm of the spanish court.--bold conduct
of its minister at rome.--celebrated partition of naples.--gonsalvo sails
against the turks.--success and cruelties of the french.--gonsalvo invades
calabria.--he punishes a mutiny.--his munificent spirit.--he captures
tarento.--seizes the duke of calabria.


during the last four years of our narrative, in which the unsettled state
of the kingdom and the progress of foreign discovery appeared to demand
the whole attention of the sovereigns, a most important revolution was
going forward in the affairs of italy. the death of charles the eighth
would seem to have dissolved the relations recently arisen between that
country and the rest of europe, and to have restored it to its ancient
independence. it might naturally have been expected that france, under her
new monarch, who had reached a mature age, rendered still more mature by
the lessons he had received in the school of adversity, would feel the
folly of reviving ambitious schemes, which had cost so dear and ended so
disastrously. italy, too, it might have been presumed, lacerated and still
bleeding at every pore, would have learned the fatal consequence of
invoking foreign aid in her domestic quarrels, and of throwing open the
gates to a torrent, sure to sweep down friend and foe indiscriminately in
its progress. but experience, alas! did not bring wisdom, and passion
triumphed as usual.

louis the twelfth, on ascending the throne, assumed the titles of duke of
milan and king of naples, thus unequivocally announcing his intention of
asserting his claims, derived through the visconti family, to the former,
and through the angevin dynasty, to the latter state. his aspiring temper
was stimulated rather than satisfied by the martial renown he had acquired
in the italian wars; and he was urged on by the great body of the french
chivalry, who, disgusted with a life of inaction, longed for a field where
they might win new laurels, and indulge in the joyous license of military
adventure.

unhappily, the court of france found ready instruments for its purpose in
the profligate politicians of italy. the roman pontiff, in particular,
alexander the sixth, whose criminal ambition assumes something respectable
by contrast with the low vices in which he was habitually steeped,
willingly lent himself to a monarch, who could so effectually serve his
selfish schemes of building up the fortunes of his family. the ancient
republic of venice, departing from her usual sagacious policy, and
yielding to her hatred of lodovico sforza, and to the lust of territorial
acquisition, consented to unite her arms with those of france against
milan, in consideration of a share (not the lion's share) of the spoils of
victory. florence, and many other inferior powers, whether from fear or
weakness, or the short-sighted hope of assistance in their petty
international feuds, consented either to throw their weight into the same
scale, or to remain neutral. [1]

having thus secured himself from molestation in italy, louis the twelfth
entered into negotiations with such other european powers, as were most
likely to interfere with his designs. the emperor maximilian, whose
relations with milan would most naturally have demanded his interposition,
was deeply entangled in a war with the swiss. the neutrality of spain was
secured by the treaty of marcoussis, august 5th, 1498, which settled all
the existing differences with that country. and a treaty with savoy in the
following year guaranteed a free passage through her mountain passes to
the french army into italy. [2]

having completed these arrangements, louis lost no time in mustering his
forces, which, descending like a torrent on the fair plains of lombardy,
effected the conquest of the entire duchy in little more than a fortnight;
and, although the prize was snatched for a moment from his grasp, yet
french valor and swiss perfidy soon restored it. the miserable sforza, the
dupe of arts which he had so long practised, was transported into france,
where he lingered out the remainder of his days in doleful captivity. he
had first called the _barbarians_ into italy, and it was a righteous
retribution which made him their earliest victim. [3]

by the conquest of milan, france now took her place among the italian
powers. a preponderating weight was thus thrown into the scale, which
disturbed the ancient political balance, and which, if the projects on
naples should be realized, would wholly annihilate it. these consequences,
to which the italian states seemed strangely insensible, had long been
foreseen by the sagacious eye of ferdinand the catholic, who watched the
movements of his powerful neighbor with the deepest anxiety. he had
endeavored, before the invasion of milan, to awaken the different
governments in italy to a sense of their danger, and to stir them up to
some efficient combination against it. [4] both he and the queen had
beheld with disquietude the increasing corruptions of the papal court, and
that shameless cupidity and lust of power, which made it the convenient
tool of the french monarch.

by their orders, garcilasso de la vega, the spanish ambassador, read a
letter from his sovereigns in the presence of his holiness, commenting on
his scandalous immorality, his invasion of ecclesiastical rights
appertaining to the spanish crown, his schemes of selfish aggrandizement,
and especially his avowed purpose of transferring his son caesar borgia,
from a sacred to a secular dignity; a circumstance that must necessarily
make him, from the manner in which it was to be conducted, the instrument
of louis the twelfth. [5]

this unsavory rebuke, which probably lost nothing of its pungency from the
tone in which it was delivered, so incensed the pope that he attempted to
seize the paper and tear it in pieces, giving vent at the same time to the
most indecent reproaches against the minister and his sovereigns.
garcilasso coolly waited till the storm had subsided, and then replied
undauntedly, "that he had uttered no more than became a loyal subject of
castile; that he should never shrink from declaring freely what his
sovereigns commanded, or what he conceived to be for the good of
christendom; and, if his holiness were displeased with it, he could
dismiss him from his court, where he was convinced, indeed, his residence
could be no longer useful." [6]

ferdinand had no better fortune at venice, where his negotiations were
conducted by lorenzo suarez de la vega, an adroit diplomatist, brother of
garcilasso. [7] these negotiations were resumed after the occupation of
milan by the french, when the minister availed himself of the jealousy
occasioned by that event to excite a determined resistance to the proposed
aggression on naples. but the republic was too sorely pressed by the
turkish war,--which sforza, in the hope of creating a diversion in his own
favor, had brought on his country,--to allow leisure for other operations.
nor did the spanish court succeed any better at this crisis with the
emperor maximilian, whose magnificent pretensions were ridiculously
contrasted with his limited authority, and still more limited revenues, so
scanty, indeed, as to gain him the contemptuous epithet among the italians
of _pochi denari_, or "the moneyless." he had conceived himself, indeed,
greatly injured, both on the score of his imperial rights and his
connection with sforza, by the conquest of milan; but, with the levity and
cupidity essential to his character, he suffered himself, notwithstanding
the remonstrances of the spanish court, to be bribed into a truce with
king louis, which gave the latter full scope for his meditated enterprise
on naples. [8]

thus disembarrassed of the most formidable means of annoyance, the french
monarch went briskly forward with his preparations, the object of which he
did not affect to conceal. frederic, the unfortunate king of naples, saw
himself with dismay now menaced with the loss of empire, before he had
time to taste the sweets of it. he knew not where to turn for refuge, in
his desolate condition, from the impending storm. his treasury was
drained, and his kingdom wasted, by the late war. his subjects, although
attached to his person, were too familiar with revolutions to stake their
lives or fortunes on the cast. his countrymen, the italians, were in the
interest of his enemy; and his nearest neighbor, the pope, had drawn from
personal pique motives for the most deadly hostility. [9] he had as little
reliance on the king of spain, his natural ally and kinsman, who, he well
knew, had always regarded the crown of naples as his own rightful
inheritance. he resolved, therefore, to apply at once to the french
monarch; and he endeavored to propitiate him by the most humiliating
concessions,--the offer of an annual tribute, and the surrender into his
hands of some of the principal fortresses in the kingdom. finding these
advances coldly received, he invoked, in the extremity of his distress,
the aid of the turkish sultan, bajazet, the terror of christendom,
requesting such supplies of troops as should enable him to make head
against their common foe. this desperate step produced no other result
than that of furnishing the enemies of the unhappy prince with a plausible
ground of accusation against him, of which they did not fail to make good
use. [10]

the spanish government, in the mean time, made the most vivid
remonstrances through its resident minister, or agents expressly
accredited for the purpose, against the proposed expedition of louis the
twelfth. it even went so far as to guarantee the faithful discharge of the
tribute proffered by the king of naples. [11] but the reckless ambition of
the french monarch, overleaping the barriers of prudence, and indeed of
common sense, disdained the fruits of conquest without the name.

ferdinand now found himself apparently reduced to the alternative of
abandoning the prize at once to the french king, or of making battle with
him in defence of his royal kinsman. the first of these measures, which
would bring a restless and powerful rival on the borders of the sicilian
dominions, was not to be thought of for a moment. the latter, which
pledged him a second time to the support of pretensions hostile to his
own, was scarcely more palatable. a third expedient suggested itself; the
partition of the kingdom, as hinted in the negotiations with charles the
eighth, [12] by which means the spanish government, if it could not rescue
the whole prize from the grasp of louis, would at least divide it with
him.

instructions were accordingly given to gralla, the minister at the court
of paris, to sound the government on this head, bringing it forward as his
own private suggestion. care was taken at the same time to secure a party
in the french councils to the interests of ferdinand. [13] the suggestions
of the spanish envoy received additional weight from the report of a
considerable armament then equipping in the port of malaga. its ostensible
purpose was to co-operate with the venetians in the defence of their
possessions in the levant. its main object, however, was to cover the
coasts of sicily in any event from the french, and to afford means for
prompt action on any point where circumstances might require it. the fleet
consisted of about sixty sail, large and small, and carried forces
amounting to six hundred horse and four thousand foot, picked men, many of
them drawn from the hardy regions of the north, which had been taxed least
severely in the moorish wars. [14]

the command of the whole was intrusted to the great captain, gonsalvo of
cordova, who since his return home had fully sustained the high
reputation, which his brilliant military talents had acquired for him
abroad. numerous volunteers, comprehending the noblest of the young
chivalry of spain, pressed forward to serve under the banner of this
accomplished and popular chieftain. among them may be particularly noticed
diego de mendoza, son of the grand cardinal, pedro de la paz, [15] gonzalo
pizarro, father of the celebrated adventurer of peru, and diego de
paredes, whose personal prowess and feats of extravagant daring furnished
many an incredible legend for chronicle and romance. with this gallant
armament the great captain weighed anchor in the port of malaga, in may,
1500, designing to touch at sicily before proceeding against the turks.
[16]

meanwhile, the negotiations between france and spain, respecting naples,
were brought to a close, by a treaty for the equal partition of that
kingdom between the two powers, ratified at granada, november 11th, 1500.
this extraordinary document, after enlarging on the unmixed evils flowing
from war, and the obligation on all christians to preserve inviolate the
blessed peace bequeathed them by the saviour, proceeds to state that no
other prince, save the kings of france and aragon, can pretend to a title
to the throne of naples; and as king frederic, its present occupant, has
seen fit to endanger the safety of all christendom, by bringing on it its
bitterest enemy the turks, the contracting parties, in order to rescue it
from this imminent peril, and preserve inviolate the bond of peace, agree
to take possession of his kingdom and divide it between them. it is then
provided that the northern portion, comprehending the terra di lavoro and
abruzzo, be assigned to france, with the title of king of naples and
jerusalem, and the southern, consisting of apulia and calabria, with the
title of duke of those provinces, to spain. the _dogana_, an important
duty levied on the flocks of the capitanate, was to be collected by the
officers of the spanish government, and divided equally with france.
lastly, any inequality between the respective territories was to be so
adjusted, that the revenues accruing to each of the parties should be
precisely equal. the treaty was to be kept profoundly secret, until
preparations were completed for the simultaneous occupation of the devoted
territory by the combined powers. [17]

such were the terms of this celebrated compact, by which two european
potentates coolly carved out and divided between them the entire dominions
of a third, who had given no cause for umbrage, and with whom they were
both at that time in perfect peace and amity. similar instances of
political robbery (to call it by the coarse name it merits) have occurred
in later times; but never one founded on more flimsy pretexts, or veiled
under a more detestable mask of hypocrisy. the principal odium of the
transaction has attached to ferdinand, as the kinsman of the unfortunate
king of naples. his conduct, however, admits of some palliatory
considerations, that cannot be claimed for louis.

the aragonese nation always regarded the bequest of ferdinand's uncle,
alfonso the fifth, in favor of his natural offspring as an unwarrantable
and illegal act. the kingdom of naples had been won by their own good
swords, and, as such, was the rightful inheritance of their own princes.
nothing but the domestic troubles of his dominions had prevented john the
second of aragon, on the decease of his brother, from asserting his claim
by arms. his son, ferdinand the catholic, had hitherto acquiesced in the
usurpation of the bastard branch of his house only from similar causes. on
the accession of the present monarch, he had made some demonstrations of
vindicating his pretensions to naples, which, however, the intelligence he
received from that kingdom induced him to defer to a more convenient
season. [18] but it was deferring, not relinquishing, his purpose. in the
mean time, he carefully avoided entering into such engagements, as should
compel him to a different policy by connecting his own interests with
those of frederic; and with this view, no doubt, rejected the alliance,
strongly solicited by the latter, of the duke of calabria, heir apparent
to the neapolitan crown, with his third daughter, the infanta maria.
indeed, this disposition of ferdinand, so far from being dissembled, was
well understood by the court of naples, as is acknowledged by its own
historians. [19]

it may be thought, that the undisturbed succession of four princes to the
throne of naples, each of whom had received the solemn recognition of the
people, might have healed any defects in their original title, however
glaring. but it may be remarked, in extenuation of both the french and
spanish claims, that the principles of monarchical succession were but
imperfectly settled in that day; that oaths of allegiance were tendered
too lightly by the neapolitans, to carry the same weight as in other
nations; and that the prescriptive right derived from possession,
necessarily indeterminate, was greatly weakened in this case by the
comparatively few years, not more than forty, during which the bastard
line of aragon had occupied the throne,--a period much shorter than that
after which the house of york had in england, a few years before,
successfully contested the validity of the lancastrian title. it should be
added, that ferdinand's views appear to have perfectly corresponded with
those of the spanish nation at large; not one writer of the time, whom i
have met with, intimating the slightest doubt of his title to naples,
while not a few insist on it with unnecessary emphasis. [20] it is but
fair to state, however, that foreigners, who contemplated the transaction
with a more impartial eye, condemned it as inflicting a deep stain on the
characters of both potentates. indeed, something like an apprehension of
this, in the parties themselves, may be inferred from their solicitude to
deprecate public censure by masking their designs under a pretended zeal
for religion.

before the conferences respecting the treaty were brought to a close, the
spanish armada under gonsalvo, after a long detention in sicily, where it
was reinforced by two thousand recruits, who had been serving as
mercenaries in italy, held its course for the morea. the turkish squadron,
lying before napoli di romania, without waiting gonsalvo's approach,
raised the siege, and retreated precipitately to constantinople. the
spanish general, then uniting his forces with the venetians, stationed at
corfu, proceeded at once against the fortified place of st. george, in
cephalonia, which the turks had lately wrested from the republic. [21]

the town stood high on a rock, in an impregnable position, and was
garrisoned by four hundred turks, all veteran soldiers, prepared to die in
its defence. we have not room for the details of this siege, in which both
parties displayed unbounded courage and resources, and which was
protracted nearly two months under all the privations of famine, and the
inclemencies of a cold and stormy winter. [22]

at length, weary with this fatal procrastination, gonsalvo and the
venetian admiral, pesaro, resolved on a simultaneous attack on separate
quarters of the town. the ramparts had been already shaken by the mining
operations of pedro navarro, who, in the italian wars, acquired such
terrible celebrity in this department, till then little understood. the
venetian cannon, larger and better served than that of the spaniards, had
opened a practicable breach in the works, which the besieged repaired with
such temporary defences as they could. the signal being given at the
appointed hour, the two armies made a desperate assault on different
quarters of the town, under cover of a murderous fire of artillery. the
turks sustained the attack with dauntless resolution, stopping up the
breach with the bodies of their dead and dying comrades, and pouring down
volleys of shot, arrows, burning oil and sulphur, and missiles of every
kind, on the heads of the assailants. but the desperate energy, as well as
numbers of the latter, proved too strong for them. some forced the breach,
others scaled the ramparts; and, after a short and deadly struggle within
the walls, the brave garrison, four-fifths of whom with their commander
had fallen, were overpowered, and the victorious banners of st. jago and
st. mark were planted side by side triumphantly on the towers. [23]

the capture of this place, although accomplished at considerable loss, and
after a most gallant resistance by a mere handful of men, was of great
service to the venetian cause; since it was the first cheek given to the
arms of bajazet, who had filched one place after another from the
republic, menacing its whole colonial territory in the levant. the
promptness and efficiency of king ferdinand's succor to the venetians
gained him high reputation throughout europe, and precisely of the kind
which he most coveted, that of being the zealous defender of the faith;
while it formed a favorable contrast to the cold supineness of the other
powers of christendom.

the capture of st. george restored to venice the possession of cephalonia;
and the great captain, having accomplished this important object, returned
in the beginning of the following year, 1501, to sicily. soon after his
arrival there, an embassy waited on him from the venetian senate, to
express their grateful sense of his services; which they testified by
enrolling his name on the golden book, as a nobleman of venice, and by a
magnificent present of plate, curious silks and velvets, and a stud of
beautiful turkish horses. gonsalvo courteously accepted the proffered
honors, but distributed the whole of the costly largess, with the
exception of a few pieces of plate, among his friends and soldiers. [24]

in the mean while, louis the twelfth having completed his preparations for
the invasion of naples, an army, consisting of one thousand lances and ten
thousand swiss and gascon foot, crossed the alps, and directed its march
towards the south. at the same time a powerful armament, under philip de
ravenstein, with six thousand five hundred additional troops on board,
quitted genoa for the neapolitan capital. the command of the land forces
was given to the sire d'aubigny, the same brave and experienced officer
who had formerly coped with gonsalvo in the campaigns of calabria. [25]

no sooner had d'aubigny crossed the papal borders, than the french and
spanish ambassadors announced to alexander the sixth and the college of
cardinals the existence of the treaty for the partition of the kingdom
between the sovereigns, their masters, requesting his holiness to confirm
it, and grant them the investiture of their respective shares. in this
very reasonable petition his holiness, well drilled in the part he was to
play, acquiesced without difficulty; declaring himself moved thereto
solely by his consideration of the pious intentions of the parties, and
the unworthiness of king frederic, whose treachery to the christian
commonwealth had forfeited all right (if he ever possessed any) to the
crown of naples. [26]

from the moment that the french forces had descended into lombardy, the
eyes of all italy were turned with breathless expectation on gonsalvo, and
his army in sicily. the bustling preparations of the french monarch had
diffused the knowledge of his designs throughout europe. those of the king
of spain, on the contrary, remained enveloped in profound secrecy. few
doubted, that ferdinand would step forward to shield his kinsman from the
invasion which menaced him, and, it might be, his own dominions in sicily;
and they looked to the immediate junction of gonsalvo with king frederic,
in order that their combined strength might overpower the enemy before he
had gained a footing in the kingdom. great was their astonishment, when
the scales dropped from their eyes, and they beheld the movements of spain
in perfect accordance with those of france, and directed to crush their
common victim between them. they could scarcely credit, says guicciardini,
that louis the twelfth could be so blind as to reject the proffered
vassalage and substantial sovereignty of naples, in order to share it with
so artful and dangerous a rival as ferdinand. [27]

the unfortunate frederic, who had been advised for some time past of the
unfriendly dispositions of the spanish government, [28] saw no refuge from
the dark tempest mustering against him on the opposite quarters of his
kingdom. he collected such troops as he could, however, in order to make
battle with the nearest enemy, before he should cross the threshold. on
the 28th of june, the french army resumed its march. before quitting rome,
a brawl arose between some french soldiers and spaniards resident in the
capital; each party asserting the paramount right of its own sovereign to
the crown of naples. from words they soon came to blows, and many lives
were lost before the fray could be quelled; a melancholy augury for the
permanence of the concord so unrighteously established between the two
governments. [29]

on the 8th of july, the french crossed the neapolitan frontier. frederic,
who had taken post at st. germano, found himself so weak, that he was
compelled to give way on its approach, and retreat on his capital. the
invaders went forward, occupying one place after another with little
resistance till they came before capua, where they received a temporary
check. during a parley for the surrender of that place, they burst into
the town, and, giving free scope to their fiendish passions, butchered
seven thousand citizens in the streets, and perpetrated outrages worse
than death on their defenceless wives and daughters. it was on this
occasion that alexander the sixth's son, the infamous caesar borgia,
selected forty of the most beautiful from the principal ladies of the
place, and sent them back to rome to swell the complement of his seraglio.
the dreadful doom of capua intimidated further resistance, but inspired
such detestation of the french throughout the country, as proved of
infinite prejudice to their cause in their subsequent struggle with the
spaniards. [30]

king frederic, shocked at bringing such calamities on his subjects,
resigned his capital without a blow in its defence, and, retreating to the
isle of ischia, soon after embraced the counsel of the french admiral
ravenstein, to accept a safe-conduct into france, and throw himself on the
generosity of louis the twelfth. the latter received him courteously, and
assigned him the duchy of anjou with an ample revenue for his maintenance,
which, to the credit of the french king, was continued after he had lost
all hope of recovering the crown of naples. [31] with this show of
magnanimity, however, he kept a jealous eye on his royal guest; under
pretence of paying him the greatest respect, he placed a guard over his
person, and thus detained him in a sort of honorable captivity to the day
of his death, which occurred soon after, in 1504.

frederic was the last of the illegitimate branch of aragon, who held the
neapolitan sceptre; a line of princes, who, whatever might be their
characters in other respects, accorded that munificent patronage to
letters which sheds a ray of glory over the roughest and most turbulent
reign. it might have been expected, that an amiable and accomplished
prince, like frederic, would have done still more towards the moral
development of his people, by healing the animosities which had so long
festered in their bosoms. his gentle character, however, was ill suited to
the evil times on which he had fallen; and it is not improbable, that he
found greater contentment in the calm and cultivated retirement of his
latter years, sweetened by the sympathies of friendship which adversity
had proved, [32] than when placed on the dazzling heights which attract
the admiration and envy of mankind. [33]

early in march, gonsalvo of cordova had received his first official
intelligence of the partition treaty, and of his own appointment to the
post of lieutenant-general of calabria and apulia. he felt natural regret
at being called to act against a prince, whose character he esteemed, and
with whom he had once been placed in the most intimate and friendly
relations. in the true spirit of chivalry, he returned to frederic, before
taking up arms against him, the duchy of st. angel and the other large
domains, with which that monarch had requited his services in the late
war, requesting at the same time to be released from his obligations of
homage and fealty. the generous monarch readily complied with the latter
part of his request, but insisted on his retaining the grant, which he
declared an inadequate compensation, after all, for the benefits the great
captain had once rendered him. [34]

the levies assembled at messina amounted to three hundred heavy-armed,
three hundred light horse, and three thousand eight hundred infantry,
together with a small body of spanish veterans, which the castilian
ambassador had collected in italy. the number of the forces was
inconsiderable, but they were in excellent condition, well disciplined,
and seasoned to all the toils and difficulties of war. on the 5th of july,
the great captain landed at tropea, and commenced the conquest of
calabria, ordering the fleet to keep along the coast, in order to furnish
whatever supplies he might need. the ground was familiar to him, and his
progress was facilitated by the old relations he had formed there, as well
as by the important posts which the spanish government had retained in its
hands, as an indemnification for the expenses of the late war.
notwithstanding the opposition or coldness of the great angevin lords who
resided in this quarter, the entire occupation of the two calabrias, with
the exception of tarento, was effected in less than a month. [35]

this city, remarkable in ancient times for its defence against hannibal,
was of the last importance. king frederic had sent thither his eldest son,
the duke of calabria, a youth about fourteen years of age, under the care
of juan de guevara, count of potenza, with a strong body of troops,
considering it the place of greatest security in his dominions.
independently of the strength of its works, it was rendered nearly
inaccessible by its natural position; having no communication with the
main land except by two bridges, at opposite quarters of the town,
commanded by strong towers, while its exposure to the sea made it easily
open to supplies from abroad.

gonsalvo saw that the only method of reducing the place must be by
blockade. disagreeable as the delay was, he prepared to lay regular siege
to it, ordering the fleet to sail round the southern point of calabria,
and blockade the port of tarento, while he threw up works on the land
side, which commanded the passes to the town, and cut off its
communications with the neighboring country. the place, however, was well
victualled, and the garrison prepared to maintain it to the last.[36]

nothing tries more severely the patience and discipline of the soldier,
than a life of sluggish inaction, unenlivened, as in the present instance,
by any of the rencontres, or feats of arms, which keep up military
excitement, and gratify the cupidity or ambition of the warrior. the
spanish troops, cooped up within their intrenchments, and disgusted with
the languid monotony of their life, cast many a wistful glance to the
stirring scenes of war in the centre of italy, where caesar borgia held
out magnificent promises of pay and plunder to all who embarked in his
adventurous enterprises. he courted the aid, in particular, of the spanish
veterans, whose worth he well understood, for they had often served under
his banner, in his feuds with the italian princes. in consequence of these
inducements, some of gonsalvo's men were found to desert every day; while
those who remained were becoming hourly more discontented, from the large
arrears due from the government; for ferdinand, as already remarked,
conducted his operations with a stinted economy, very different from the
prompt and liberal expenditure of the queen, always competent to its
object. [37]

a trivial incident, at this time, swelled the popular discontent into
mutiny. the french fleet, after the capture of naples, was ordered to the
levant to assist the venetians against the turks. ravenstein, ambitious of
eclipsing the exploits of the great captain, turned his arms against
mitilene, with the design of recovering it for the republic. he totally
failed in the attack, and his fleet was soon after scattered by a tempest,
and his own ship wrecked on the isle of cerigo. he subsequently found his
way, with several of his principal officers, to the shores of calabria,
where he landed in the most forlorn and desperate plight. gonsalvo,
touched with his misfortunes, no sooner learned his necessities, than he
sent him abundant supplies of provisions, adding a service of plate, and a
variety of elegant apparel for himself and followers; consulting his own
munificent spirit in this, much more than the limited state of his
finances. [38]

this excessive liberality was very inopportune. the soldiers loudly
complained that their general found treasures to squander on foreigners,
while his own troops were defrauded of their pay. the biscayans, a people
of whom gonsalvo used to say, "he had rather be a lion-keeper than
undertake to govern them," took the lead in the tumult. it soon swelled
into open insurrection; and the men, forming themselves into regular
companies, marched to the general's quarters and demanded payment of their
arrears. one fellow, more insolent than the rest, levelled a pike at his
breast with the most angry and menacing looks. gonsalvo, however,
retaining his self-possession, gently put it aside, saying, with a good-
natured smile, "higher, you careless knave, lift your lance higher, or you
will run me through in your jesting." as he was reiterating his assurances
of the want of funds, and his confident expectation of speedily obtaining
them, a biscayan captain called out, "send your daughter to the brothel,
and that will soon put you in funds!" this, was a favorite daughter named
elvira, whom gonsalvo loved so tenderly, that he would not part with her,
even in his campaigns. although stung to the heart by this audacious
taunt, he made no reply; but, without changing a muscle of his
countenance, continued, in the same tone as before, to expostulate with
the insurgents, who at length were prevailed on to draw off, and disperse
to their quarters. the next morning, the appalling spectacle of the
lifeless body of the biscayan, hanging by the neck from a window of the
house in which he had been quartered, admonished the, army that there were
limits to the general's forbearance it was not prudent to overstep. [39]

an unexpected event, which took place at this juncture, contributed even
more than this monitory lesson to restore subordination to the army. this
was the capture of a genoese galleon with a valuable freight, chiefly
iron, bound to some turkish port, as it was said, in the levant, which
gonsalvo, moved no doubt by his zeal for the christian cause, ordered to
be seized by the spanish cruisers; and the cargo to be disposed of for the
satisfaction of his troops. giovio charitably excuses this act of
hostility against a friendly power with the remark, that "when the great
captain did anything contrary to law, he was wont to say, 'a general must
secure the victory at all hazards, right or wrong; and, when he has done
this, he can compensate those whom he has injured with tenfold benefits.'"
[40]

the unexpected length of the siege of tarento determined gonsalvo, at
length, to adopt bolder measures for quickening its termination. the city,
whose insulated position has been noticed, was bounded on the north by a
lake, or rather arm of the sea, forming an excellent interior harbor,
about eighteen miles in circumference. the inhabitants, trusting to the
natural defences of this quarter, had omitted to protect it by
fortifications, and the houses rose abruptly from the margin of the basin.
into this reservoir, the spanish commander resolved to transport such of
his vessels then riding in the outer bay, as from their size could be
conveyed across the narrow isthmus, which divided it from the inner.

after incredible toil, twenty of the smallest craft were moved on huge
cars and rollers across the intervening land, and safely launched on the
bosom of the lake. the whole operation was performed amid the exciting
accompaniments of discharges of ordnance, strains of martial music, and
loud acclamations of the soldiery. the inhabitants of tarento saw with
consternation the fleet so lately floating in the open ocean under their
impregnable walls, now quitting its native element, and moving, as it were
by magic, across the land, to assault them on the quarter where they were
the least defended. [41]

the neapolitan commander perceived it would be impossible to hold out
longer, without compromising the personal safety of the young prince under
his care. he accordingly entered into negotiations for a truce with the
great captain, during which articles of capitulation were arranged,
guaranteeing to the duke of calabria and his followers the right of
evacuating the place and going wherever they listed. the spanish general,
in order to give greater solemnity to these engagements, bound himself to
observe them by an oath on the sacrament. [42]

on the 1st of march, 1502, the spanish army took possession, according to
agreement, of the city of tarento; and the duke of calabria with his suite
was permitted to leave it, in order to rejoin his father in france. in the
mean time, advices were received from ferdinand the catholic, instructing
gonsalvo on no account to suffer the young prince to escape from his
hands, as he was a pledge of too great importance for the spanish
government to relinquish. the general in consequence sent after the duke,
who had proceeded in company with the count of potenza as far as bitonto,
on his way to the north, and commanded him to be arrested and brought back
to tarento. not long after, he caused him to be conveyed on board one of
the men-of-war in the harbor, and, in contempt of his solemn engagements,
sent a prisoner to spain. [43]

the national writers have made many awkward attempts to varnish over this
atrocious act of perfidy in their favorite hero. zurita vindicates it by a
letter from the neapolitan prince to gonsalvo, requesting the latter to
take this step, since he preferred a residence in spain to one in france,
but could not with decency appear to act in opposition to his father's
wishes on the subject. if such a letter, however, were really obtained
from the prince, his tender years would entitle it to little weight, and
of course it would afford no substantial ground for justification. another
explanation is offered by paolo giovio, who states that the great captain,
undetermined what course to adopt, took the opinion of certain learned
jurists. this sage body decided, that gonsalvo was not bound by his oath,
since it was repugnant to his paramount obligations to his master; and
that the latter was not bound by it, since it was made without his
privity! [44] the man who trusts his honor to the tampering of casuists,
has parted with it already. [45]

the only palliation of the act must be sought in the prevalent laxity and
corruption of the period, which is rife with examples of the most flagrant
violation of both public and private faith. had this been the act of a
sforza, indeed, or a borgia, it could not reasonably have excited
surprise. but coming from one of a noble, magnanimous nature, like
gonsalvo, exemplary in his private life, and unstained with any of the
grosser vices of the age, it excited general astonishment and reprobation,
even among his contemporaries. it has left a reproach on his name, which
the historian may regret, but cannot wipe away.


footnotes

[1] guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 4, p. 214, ed. 1645.--flassan,
diplomatie francaise, tom. i. pp. 275, 277.

[2] dumont, corps diplomatique, tom. iii. pp. 397-400.--flassan,
diplomatie francaise, tom. i. p. 279.

[3] guicciardini, istoria, lib. 4, pp. 250-252.--memoires de la tremoille,
chap. 19, apud petitot, collection de memoires, tom. xiv.--buonaccorsi,
diario de' successi piu importanti, (fiorenza, 1568,) pp. 26-29.

[4] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 31.

martyr, in a letter written soon after sforza's recovery of his capital,
says that the spanish sovereigns "could not conceal their joy at the
event, such was their jealousy of france." (opus epist., epist. 213.) the
same sagacious writer, the distance of whose residence from italy removed
him from those political factions and prejudices which clouded the optics
of his countrymen, saw with deep regret their coalition with france, the
fatal consequences of which he predicted in a letter to a friend in
venice, the former minister at the spanish court. "the king of france,"
says he, "after he has dined with the duke of milan, will come and sup
with you." (epist. 207.) daru, on the authority of burchard, refers this
remarkable prediction, which time so fully verified, to sforza, on his
quitting his capital. (hist. de venise, tom. iii. p. 326, 2d ed.) martyr's
letter, however, is dated some months previously to that event.

[5] louis xii., for the good offices of the pope in the affair of his
divorce from the unfortunate jeanne of france, promised the un-cardinalled
caesar borgia the duchy of valence in dauphiny, with a rent of 20,000
livres, and a considerable force to support him in his flagitious
enterprises against the princes of romagna. guicciardini, istoria, tom. i.
lib. 4, p. 207.--sismondi, hist. des francais, tom. xv. p. 275.--carta de
garcilasso de la vega, ms.

[6] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 33.

garcilasso de la vega seems to have possessed little of the courtly and
politic address of a diplomatist. in a subsequent audience, which the pope
gave him together with a special embassy from castile, his blunt
expostulation so much exasperated his holiness, that the latter hinted it
would not cost him much to have him thrown into the tiber. the hold
bearing of the castilian, however, appears to have had its effect; since
we find the pope soon after revoking an offensive ecclesiastical provision
he had made in spain, taking occasion at the same time to eulogize the
character of the catholic sovereigns in full consistory. ibid., lib. 3,
cap. 33, 35.

[7] oviedo has made this cavalier the subject of one of his dialogues.
quincuagenas, ms., bat. 1, quinc. 3, dial. 44.

[8] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 38, 39.--daru,
hist. de venise, tom. iii. pp. 336, 339, 347.--muratori, annali d'italia,
(milano, 1820,) tom. xiv. pp. 9, 10.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib.
5, p. 260.

[9] alexander vi. had requested the hand of carlotta, daughter of king
frederic, for his son, caesar borgia; but this was a sacrifice, at which
pride and parental affection alike revolted. the slight was not to be
forgiven by the implacable borgias. comp. giannone, istoria di napoli,
lib. 29, cap. 3.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 4, p. 223.--zurita,
hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 22.

[10] guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 5, pp. 265, 266.--giannone,
istoria di napoli, lib. 29, cap. 3.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom.
i. lib. 3, cap. 40.--giovio, vita magni gonsalvi, lib. 1, p. 229.--daru,
hist. de venise, tom. iii. p, 338.

[11] peter martyr, opus epist., lib. 14, epist. 218.

[12] see part ii. chapter 3, of this history.

[13] according to zurita, ferdinand secured the services of guillaume de
poictiers, lord of clerieux and governor of paris, by the promise of the
city of cotron, mortgaged to him in italy. (hist. del rey hernando, lib.
3, cap. 40.) comines calls the same nobleman "a good sort of a man, qui
aisement croit, et pour especial _tels personnages_," meaning king
ferdinand. comines, memoires, liv. 8, chap. 23.

[14] bembo, istoria viniziana, tom. iii. lib. 5, p. 324.--ulloa, vita et
fatti dell' invitissimo imperatore carlo v., (venetia, 1606,) fol. 2.--
mariana, hist. de espana, tom. ii. lib. 27, cap. 7.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, tom. i. p. 226.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4,
cap. 11.--abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 10, sec. 13.

[15] this cavalier, one of the most valiant captains in the army, was so
diminutive in size, that, when mounted, he seemed almost lost in the high
demipeak war-saddle then in vogue; which led a wag, according to brantome,
when asked if he had seen don pedro de paz pass that way, to answer, that
"he had seen his horse and saddle, but no rider." oeuvres, tom. i. disc.
9.

[16] ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom. viii. p. 217.--bernaldez, reyes
catolicos, ms., cap. 161.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 9.

[17] see the original treaty, apud dumont, corps diplomatique, tom. iii.
pp. 445, 446.

[18] see part ii. chapter 3, of this history.

[19] giannone, istoria di napoli, lib. 19, cap. 3.--zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 32.

[20] see, in particular, the doctor salazar de mendoza, who exhausts the
subject,--and the reader's patience,--in discussing the multifarious
grounds of the incontrovertible title of the house of aragon to naples.
monarquia, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 12-15.

[21] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, tom. i. p. 226.--chronica del gran
capitan, cap. 9.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 19.

[22] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, ubi supra.--chronica del gran capitan,
cap. 14.

[23] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, ubi supra.--chronica del gran capitan,
cap. 10.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 25.--
bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 167.

[24] bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 167.--quintana, espanoles
celebres, tom. i. p. 246.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 228.--ulloa,
vita di carlo v., fol. 4.

[25] jean d'auton, histoire de louys xii., (paris, 1622,) part. 1, chap.
44, 45, 48.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. p. 265.--sainct gelais,
histoire de louys xii., (paris, 1622,) p. 163.--buonaccorsi, diario, p.
46.

[26] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 43.--lanuza,
historias, tom. i. lib. 1, cap. 14.

[27] guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 5, p. 266.--ulloa, vita di carlo
v., fol. 8.

[28] in the month of april the king of naples received letters from his
envoys in spain, written by command of king ferdinand, informing him that
he had nothing to expect from that monarch in case of an invasion of his
territories by france. frederic bitterly complained of the late hour at
which this intelligence was given, which effectually prevented an
accommodation he might otherwise have made with king louis. lanuza,
historias, lib. 1, cap. 14.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib.
4, cap. 37.

[29] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 1, chap. 48.

[30] summonte, hist. di napoli, tom. iii. lib. 6, cap. 4.--d'auton, hist.
de louys xii., part. 1, chap. 51-54.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 8.--
guicciardini, istoria, lib. 5, pp. 268, 269.--zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 41.--giannone, istoria di napoli, lib. 29,
cap. 3.

[31] st. gelais, hist. de louys xii., p. 163.--d'auton, hist. de louys
xii., part. 1, ch. 56.--summonte, hist. di napoli, tom. iii. p. 541.

[32] the reader will readily call to mind the neapolitan poet sannazaro,
whose fidelity to his royal master forms so beautiful a contrast with the
conduct of pontano, and indeed of too many of his tribe, whose gratitude
is of that sort that will only rise above zero in the sunshine of a court.
his various poetical effusions afford a noble testimony to the virtues of
his unfortunate sovereign, the more unsuspicious as many of them were
produced in the days of his adversity.

[33] "neque mala vel bona," says the philosophic roman, "quae vulgus
putet; multos, qui conflictari udversis videantur, beatos; ac plerosque,
quamquam magnas per opes, miserrimos; si illi gravem fortunam constanter
tolerent, hi prospera inconsulte utantur." tacitus, annales, lib. 6, sect.
22.

[34] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 35.--giovio,
vitae illust. virorum, p. 230.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 21.--
lanuza, historias, tom. i. lib. 1, cap. 14.

[35] abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 11, sec. 8.--zurita,
hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 44.--mariana, hist. de
espana, tom. ii. lib. 27, cap. 9.

[36] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 231.--ulloa, vita di carlo v, fol.
9.--giannone, istoria di napoli, lib. 29, cap. 3.--chronica del gran
capitan, cap. 31.

[37] don juan mannel, the spanish minister at vienna, seems to hare been
fully sensible of this trait of his master. he told the emperor
maximilian, who had requested the loan of 300,000 ducats from spain, that
it was as much money as would suffice king ferdinand for the conquest, not
merely of italy, but africa into the bargain. zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 3, cap. 42.

[38] bembo, istoria viniziana, tom. iii. lib. 6, p. 368.--giovio, vitae
illust. virorum, p. 232.--d'auton, part. 1, chap. 71, 72.

[39] chronica del gran capitan, cap. 34.--quintana, espanoles celebres,
tom. i. pp. 252, 253.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 232.--carta de
gonzalo, ms.

[40] giovio, vita magni gonsalvi, lib. 1, p. 233.

[41] gonsalvo took the hint for this, doubtless, from hannibal's similar
expedient. see polybius, lib. 8.

[42] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 52, 53.--
guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 5, p. 270.--giannone, istoria di
napoli, lib. 29, cap. 3.--muratori, annali d'italia, tom. xiv. p. 14.

the various authorities differ more irreconcilably than usual in the
details of the siege. i have followed paolo giovio, a contemporary, and
personally acquainted with the principal actors. all agree in the only
fact, in which one would willingly see some discrepancy, gonsalvo's breach
of faith to the young duke of calabria.

[43] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 56.--abarca,
reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 11, sec. 10-12.--ulloa, vita di
carlo v., fol. 9.--lanuza, historias, lib. 1, cap. 14.

martyr, who was present on the young prince's arrival at court, where he
experienced the most honorable reception, speaks of him in the highest
terms. "adolescens namque est et regno et regio sanguine dignus, mirae
indolis, forma egregius." (see opus epist., epist. 252.) he survived to
the year 1550, but without ever quitting spain, contrary to the fond
prediction of his friend sannazaro;

  "nam mihl, nam tempus veniet, cum reddita sceptra
  parthenopes, fractosque tua sub cuspide reges
  ipse canam."
                    opera latina, ecloga 4.

[44] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, lib. 4, cap. 58.--giovio, vitae
illust. virorum, lib. 1, p. 234.

mariana coolly disposes of gonsalvo's treachery with the remark, "no
parece se le guardo lo que tenian asentado. en la guerra quien hay que de
todo punto lo guarde?" (hist. de espana, tom. ii. p. 675.)

   ----"dolus an virtus, quis in hoste requirat?"

[45] in gonsalvo's correspondence is a letter to the sovereigns written
soon after the occupation of tarento, in which he mentions his efforts to
secure the duke of calabria in the spanish interests. the communication is
too brief to clear up the difficulties in this dark transaction. as coming
from gonsalvo himself, it has great interest, and i will give it to the
reader in the curious orthography of the original. "asi en la platica que
estava con el duque don fernando de ponerse al servicio y amparo de
vuestras altecas syn otro partido ny ofrecimiento demas de certificarle
que en todo tiempo seria libre para yr donde quisiese sy vuestras altezas
bien no le tratasen y que vuestras altecas le ternian el respeto que a tal
persona como el se deve. el conde de potenca e algunos de los que estan
ceerca del han trabajado por apartarle de este proposito e levarle a iscla
asi yo por muchos modos he procurado de reducirle al servicio de vuestras
altecas y tengole en tal termino que puedo certificar a vuestras altecas
que este mozo no les saldra de la mano con consenso suyo del servicio de
vuestras altecas asta tanto que vuestras altecas me embien a mandar como
del he de disponer e de lo que con el se ha de facer y por las contrastes
que en esto han entrevenido no ha salido de taranto porque asi ha
convenido. el viernes que sera once de marzo saldra a castellaneta que es
quince millas de aqui con algunos destos suyos que le quieren seguir con
alguna buena parte de compania destos criados de vuestras altecas para
acompanarle y este mismo dia viernes entrar an las vanderas e gente de
vuestras altecas en el castillo de tarento con ayuda de nuestro senor." de
tarento, 10 de marzo, 1502, ms.




chapter xi.

italian wars.--rupture with france.--gonsalvo besieged in barleta.

1502, 1503.

rupture between the french and spaniards.--gonsalvo retires to barleta.--
chivalrous character of the war.--tourney near trani.--duel between bayard
and sotomayor.--distress of barleta.--constancy of the spaniards.
--gonsalvo storms and takes ruvo.--prepares to leave barleta.


it was hardly to be expected that the partition treaty between france and
spain, made so manifestly in contempt of all good faith, would be
maintained any longer than suited the convenience of the respective
parties. the french monarch, indeed, seems to have prepared, from the
first, to dispense with it, as soon as he had secured his own moiety of
the kingdom; [1] and sagacious men at the spanish court inferred that king
ferdinand would do as much, when he should be in a situation to assert his
claims with success. [2]

it was altogether improbable, whatever might be the good faith of the
parties, that an arrangement could long subsist, which so rudely rent
asunder the members of this ancient monarchy; or that a thousand points of
collision should not arise between rival hosts, lying as it were on their
arms within bowshot of each other, and in view of the rich spoil which
each regarded as its own. such grounds for rupture did occur, sooner
probably than either party had foreseen, and certainly before the king of
aragon was prepared to meet it.

the immediate cause was the extremely loose language of the partition
treaty, which assumed such a geographical division of the kingdom into
four provinces, as did not correspond with any ancient division, and still
less with the modern, by which the number was multiplied to twelve. [3]
the central portion, comprehending the capitanate, the basilicate, and the
principality, became debatable ground between the parties, each of whom
insisted on these as forming an integral part of its own moiety. the
french had no ground whatever for contesting the possession of the
capitanate, the first of these provinces, and by far the most important,
on account of the tolls paid by the numerous flocks which descended every
winter into its sheltered valleys from the snow-covered mountains of
abruzzo. [4] there was more uncertainty to which of the parties the two
other provinces were meant to be assigned. it is scarcely possible that
language so loose, in a matter requiring mathematical precision, should
have been unintentional.

before gonsalvo de cordova had completed the conquest of the southern
moiety of the kingdom, and while lying before tarento, he received
intelligence of the occupation by the french of several places, both in
the capitanate and basilicate. he detached a body of troops for the
protection of these countries, and, after the surrender of tarento,
marched towards the north to cover them with his whole army. as he was not
in a condition for immediate hostilities, however, he entered into
negotiations, which, if attended with no other advantage, would at least
gain him time. [5]

the pretensions of the two parties, as might have been expected, were too
irreconcilable to admit of compromise; and a personal conference between
the respective commanders-in-chief led to no better arrangement, than that
each should retain his present acquisitions, till explicit instructions
could be received from their respective courts.

but neither of the two monarchs had further instructions to give; and the
catholic king contented himself with admonishing his general to postpone
an open rupture as long as possible, that the government might have time
to provide more effectually for his support, and strengthen itself by
alliance with other european powers. but, however pacific may have been
the disposition of the generals, they had no power to control the passions
of their soldiers, who, thus brought into immediate contact, glared on
each other with the ferocity of bloodhounds, ready to slip the leash which
held them in temporary check. hostilities soon broke out along the lines
of the two armies, the blame of which each nation charged on its opponent.
there seems good ground, however, for imputing it to the french; since
they were altogether better prepared for war than the spaniards, and
entered into it so heartily as not only to assail places in the debatable
ground, but in apulia, which had been unequivocally assigned to their
rivals. [6]

in the mean while, the spanish court fruitlessly endeavored to interest
the other powers of europe in its cause. the emperor maximilian, although
dissatisfied with the occupation of milan by the french, appeared wholly
engrossed with the frivolous ambition of a roman coronation. the pontiff
and his son, caesar borgia, were closely bound to king louis by the
assistance which he had rendered them in their marauding enterprises
against the neighboring chiefs of romagna. the other italian princes,
although deeply incensed and disgusted by this infamous alliance, stood
too much in awe of the colossal power, which had planted its foot so
firmly on their territory, to offer any resistance. venice alone,
surveying from her distant watch-tower, to borrow the words of peter
martyr, the whole extent of the political horizon, appeared to hesitate.
the french ambassadors loudly called on her to fulfil the terms of her
late treaty with their master, and support him in his approaching quarrel;
but that wily republic saw with distrust the encroaching ambition of her
powerful neighbor, and secretly wished that a counterpoise might be found
in the success of aragon. martyr, who stopped at venice on his return from
egypt, appeared before the senate, and employed all his eloquence in
supporting his master's cause in opposition to the french envoys; but his
pressing entreaties to the spanish sovereigns to send thither some
competent person, as a resident minister, show his own conviction of the
critical position in which their affairs stood. [7]

the letters of the same intelligent individual, during his journey through
the milanese, [8] are filled with the most gloomy forebodings of the
termination of a contest for which the spaniards were so indifferently
provided; while the whole north of italy was alive with the bustling
preparations of the french, who loudly vaunted their intention of driving
their enemy not merely out of naples, but sicily itself. [9]

louis the twelfth superintended these preparations in person, and, to be
near the theatre of operations, crossed the alps, and took up his quarters
at asti. at length, all being in readiness, he brought things to an
immediate issue, by commanding his general to proclaim war at once against
the spaniards, unless they abandoned the capitanate in four-and-twenty
hours. [10]

the french forces in naples amounted, according to their own statements,
to one thousand men-at-arms, three thousand five hundred french and
lombard, and three thousand swiss infantry, in addition to the neapolitan
levies raised by the angevin lords throughout the kingdom. the command was
intrusted to the duke of nemours, a brave and chivalrous young nobleman of
the ancient house of armagnac, whom family connections more than talents
had raised to the perilous post of viceroy over the head of the veteran
d'aubigny. the latter would have thrown up his commission in disgust, but
for the remonstrances of his sovereign, who prevailed on him to remain
where his counsels were more than ever necessary to supply the
inexperience of the young commander. the jealousy and wilfulness of the
latter, however, defeated these intentions; and the misunderstanding of
the chiefs, extending to their followers, led to a fatal want of concert
in their movements.

with these officers were united some of the best and bravest of the french
chivalry; among whom may be noticed jacques de chabannes, more commonly
known as the sire de la palice, a favorite of louis the twelfth, and well
entitled to be so by his deserts; louis d'ars; ives d'alegre, brother of
the precy who gained so much renown in the wars of charles the eighth; and
pierre de bayard, the knight "sans peur et sans reproche," who was then
entering on the honorable career in which he seemed to realize all the
imaginary perfections of chivalry. [11]

notwithstanding the small numbers of the french force, the great captain
was in no condition to cope with them. he had received no reinforcements
from home since he first landed in calabria. his little corps of veterans
was destitute of proper clothing and equipments, and the large arrears due
them made the tenure of their obedience extremely precarious. [12] since
affairs began to assume their present menacing aspect, he had been busily
occupied with drawing together the detachments posted in various parts of
calabria, and concentrating them on the town of atella in the basilicate,
where he had established his own quarters. he had also opened a
correspondence with the barons of the aragonese faction, who were most
numerous as well as most powerful in the northern section of the kingdom,
which had been assigned to the french. he was particularly fortunate in
gaining over the two colonnas, whose authority, powerful connections, and
large military experience proved of inestimable value to him. [13]

with all the resources he could command, however, gonsalvo found himself,
as before noticed, unequal to the contest, though it was impossible to
defer it, after the peremptory summons of the french viceroy to surrender
the capitanate. to this he unhesitatingly answered, that "the capitanate
belonged of right to his own master; and that, with the blessing of god,
he would make good its defence against the french king, or any other who
should invade it."

notwithstanding the bold front put on his affairs, however, he did not
choose to abide the assault of the french in his present position. he
instantly drew off with the greater part of his force to barleta, a
fortified seaport on the confines of apulia, on the adriatic, the
situation of which would enable him either to receive supplies from
abroad, or to effect a retreat, if necessary, on board the spanish fleet,
which still kept the coast of calabria. the remainder of his army he
distributed in bari, andria, canosa, and other adjacent towns; where he
confidently hoped to maintain himself till the arrival of reinforcements,
which he solicited in the most pressing manner from spain and sicily,
should enable him to take the field on more equal terms against his
adversary. [14]

the french officers, in the mean time, were divided in opinion as to the
best mode of conducting the war. some were for besieging bari, held by the
illustrious and unfortunate isabella of aragon; [15] others, in a more
chivalrous spirit, opposed the attack of a place defended by a female, and
advised an immediate assault on barleta itself, whose old and dilapidated
works might easily be forced, if it did not at once surrender. the duke of
nemours, deciding on a middle course, determined to invest the last-
mentioned town; and, cutting off all communication with the surrounding
country, to reduce it by regular blockade. this plan was unquestionably
the least eligible of all, as it would allow time for the enthusiasm of
the french, the _furia francese_, as it was called in italy, which carried
them victorious over so many obstacles, to evaporate, while it brought
into play the stern resolve, the calm, unflinching endurance, which
distinguished the spanish soldier. [16]

one of the first operations of the french viceroy was the siege of canosa,
a strongly fortified place west of barleta, garrisoned by six hundred
picked men under the engineer pedro navarro. the defence of the place
justified the reputation of this gallant soldier. he beat off two
successive assaults of the enemy, led on by bayard, la palice, and the
flower of their chivalry. he had prepared to sustain a third, resolved to
bury himself under the ruins of the town rather than surrender. but
gonsalvo, unable to relieve it, commanded him to make the best terms he
could, saying, "the place was of far less value, than the lives of the
brave men who defended it." navarro found no difficulty in obtaining an
honorable capitulation; and the little garrison, dwindled to one-third of
its original number, marched out through the enemy's camp, with colors
flying and music playing, as if in derision of the powerful force it had
so nobly kept at bay. [17]

after the capture of canosa, d'aubigny, whose misunderstanding with
nemours still continued, was despatched with a small force into the south,
to overrun the two calabrias. the viceroy, in the mean while, having
fruitlessly attempted the reduction of several strong places held by the
spaniards in the neighborhood of barleta, endeavored to straiten the
garrison there by desolating the surrounding country, and sweeping off the
flocks and herds which grazed in its fertile pastures. the spaniards,
however, did not remain idle within their defences, but, sallying out in
small detachments, occasionally retrieved the spoil from the hands of the
enemy, or annoyed him with desultory attacks, ambuscades, and other
irregular movements of _guerrilla_ warfare, in which the french were
comparatively unpractised. [18]

the war now began to assume many of the romantic features of that of
granada. the knights on both sides, not content with the usual military
rencontres, defied one another to jousts and tourneys, eager to establish
their prowess in the noble exercises of chivalry. one of the most
remarkable of these meetings took place between eleven spanish and as many
french knights, in consequence of some disparaging remarks of the latter
on the cavalry of their enemies, which they affirmed inferior to their
own. the venetians gave the parties a fair field of combat in the neutral
territory under their own walls of trani. a gallant array of well-armed
knights of both nations guarded the lists, and maintained the order of the
fight. on the appointed day, the champions appeared in the field, armed at
all points, with horses richly caparisoned, and barbed or covered with
steel panoply like their masters. the roofs and battlements of trani were
covered with spectators, while the lists were thronged with the french and
spanish chivalry, each staking in some degree the national honor on the
issue of the contest. among the castilians were diego de paredes and diego
de vera, while the good knight bayard was most conspicuous on the other
side.

as the trumpets sounded the appointed signal, the hostile parties rushed
to the encounter. three spaniards were borne from their saddles by the
rudeness of the shock, and four of their antagonists' horses slain. the
fight, which began at ten in the morning, was not to be protracted beyond
sunset. long before that hour, all the french save two, one of them the
chevalier bayard, had been dismounted, and their horses, at which the
spaniards had aimed more than at the riders, disabled or slain. the
spaniards, seven of whom were still on horseback, pressed hard on their
adversaries, leaving little doubt of the fortune of the day. the latter,
however, intrenching themselves behind the carcasses of their dead horses,
made good their defence against the spaniards, who in vain tried to spur
their terrified steeds over the barrier. in this way the fight was
protracted till sunset; and, as both parties continued to keep possession
of the field, the palm of victory was adjudged to neither, while both were
pronounced to have demeaned themselves like good and valiant knights. [19]

the tourney being ended, the combatants met in the centre of the lists,
and embraced each other in the true companionship of chivalry, "making
good cheer together," says an old chronicler, before they separated. the
great captain was not satisfied with the issue of the fight. "we have, at
least," said one of his champions, "disproved the taunt of the frenchmen,
and shown ourselves as good horsemen as they." "i sent you for better,"
coldly retorted gonsalvo. [20]

a more tragic termination befell a combat _a l'outrance_ between the
chevalier bayard and a spanish cavalier, named alonso de sotomayor, who
had accused the former of uncourteous treatment of him, while his
prisoner. bayard denied the charge, and defied the spaniard to prove it in
single fight, on horse or on foot, as he best liked. sotomayor, aware of
his antagonist's uncommon horsemanship, preferred the latter alternative.

at the day and hour appointed, the two knights entered the lists, armed
with sword and dagger, and sheathed in complete harness; although, with a
degree of temerity unusual in these, combats, they wore their visors up.
both combatants knelt down in silent prayer for a few moments, and then
rising and crossing themselves, advanced straight against each other; "the
good knight bayard," says brantome, "moving as light of step, as if he
were going to lead some fair lady down the dance."

the spaniard was of a large and powerful frame, and endeavored to crush
his enemy by weight of blows, or to close with him and bring him to the
ground. the latter, naturally inferior in strength, was rendered still
weaker by a fever, from which he had not entirely recovered. he was more
light and agile than his adversary, however, and superior dexterity
enabled him not only to parry his enemy's strokes, but to deal him
occasionally one of his own, while he sorely distressed him by the
rapidity of his movements. at length, as the spaniard was somewhat thrown
off his balance by an ill-directed blow, bayard struck him so sharply on
the gorget, that it gave way, and the sword entered his throat. furious
with the agony of the wound, sotomayor collected all his strength for the
last struggle, and, grasping his antagonist in his arms, they both rolled
in the dust together. before either could extricate himself, the quick-
eyed bayard, who had retained his poniard in his left hand during the
whole combat, while the spaniard's had remained in his belt, drove the
steel with such convulsive strength under his enemy's eye, that it pierced
quite through the brain. after the judges had awarded the honors of the
day to bayard, the minstrels as usual began to pour forth triumphant
strains in praise of the victor; but the good knight commanded them to
desist, and, having first prostrated himself on his knees in gratitude for
his victory, walked slowly out of the lists, expressing a wish that the
combat had had a different termination, so that his honor had been saved.
[2]

in these jousts and tourneys, described with sufficient prolixity, but in
a truly heart-stirring tone, by the chroniclers of the day, we may discern
the last gleam of the light of chivalry, which illumined the darkness of
the middle ages; and, although rough in comparison with the pastimes of
more polished times, they called forth such displays of magnificence,
courtesy, and knightly honor, as throw something like the grace of
civilization over the ferocious features of the age.

while the spaniards, cooped up within the old town of barleta, sought to
vary the monotony of their existence by these chivalrous exercises, or an
occasional foray into the neighboring country, they suffered greatly from
the want of military stores, food, clothing, and the most common
necessaries of life. it seemed as if their master had abandoned them to
their fate on this forlorn outpost, without a struggle in their behalf.
[22] how different from the parental care with which isabella watched over
the welfare of her soldiers in the long war of granada! the queen appears
to have taken no part in the management of these wars, which,
notwithstanding the number of her own immediate subjects embarked in them,
she probably regarded, from the first, as appertaining to aragon, as
exclusively as the conquests in the new world did to castile. indeed,
whatever degree of interest she may have felt in their success, the
declining state of her health at this period would not have allowed her to
take any part in the conduct of them.

gonsalvo was not wanting to himself in this trying emergency, and his
noble spirit seemed to rise as all outward and visible resources failed.
he cheered his troops with promises of speedy relief, talking confidently
of the supplies of grain he expected from sicily, and the men and money he
was to receive from spain and venice. he contrived, too, says giovio, that
a report should get abroad, that a ponderous coffer lying in his apartment
was filled with gold, which he could draw upon in the last extremity. the
old campaigners, indeed, according to the same authority, shook their
heads at these and other agreeable fictions of their general, with a very
skeptical air. they derived some confirmation, however, from the arrival
soon after of a sicilian bark, laden with corn, and another from venice
with various serviceable stores and wearing apparel, which gonsalvo bought
on his own credit and that of his principal officers, and distributed
gratuitously among his destitute soldiers. [23]

at this time he received the unwelcome tidings that a small force which
had been sent from spain to his assistance, under don manuel de benavides,
and which had effected a junction with one much larger from sicily under
hugo de cardona, was surprised by d'aubigny near terranova, and totally
defeated. this disaster was followed by the reduction of all calabria,
which the latter general, at the head of his french and scottish
gendarmerie, rode over from one extremity to the other without opposition.
[24]

the prospect now grew darker and darker around the little garrison of
barleta. the discomfiture of benavides excluded hopes of relief in that
direction. the gradual occupation of most of the strong places in apulia
by the duke of nemours cut off all communication with the neighboring
country; and a french fleet cruising in the adriatic rendered the arrival
of further stores and reinforcements extremely precarious. gonsalvo,
however, maintained the same unruffled cheerfulness as before, and
endeavored to infuse it into the hearts of others. he perfectly understood
the character of his countrymen, knew all their resources, and tried to
rouse every latent principle of honor, loyalty, pride, and national
feeling; and such was the authority which he acquired over their minds,
and so deep the affection which he inspired, by the amenity of his manners
and the generosity of his disposition, that not a murmur or symptom of
insubordination escaped them during the whole of this long and painful
siege. but neither the excellence of his troops, nor the resources of his
own genius, would have been sufficient to extricate gonsalvo from the
difficulties of his situation, without the most flagrant errors on the
part of his opponent. the spanish general, who understood the character of
the french commander perfectly well, lay patiently awaiting his
opportunity, like a skilful fencer, ready to make a decisive thrust at the
first vulnerable point that should be presented. such an occasion at
length offered itself early in the following year. [25]

the french, no less weary than their adversaries of their long inaction,
sallied out from canosa, where the viceroy had established his
headquarters, and, crossing the ofanto, marched up directly under the
walls of barleta, with the intention of drawing out the garrison from the
"old den," as they called it, and deciding the quarrel in a pitched
battle. the duke of nemours, accordingly, having taken up his position,
sent a trumpet into the place to defy the great captain to the encounter;
but the latter returned for answer, that "he was accustomed to choose his
own place and time for fighting, and would thank the french general to
wait till his men found time to shoe their horses, and burnish up their
arms." at length, nemours, after remaining some days, and finding there
was no chance of decoying his wily foe from his defences, broke up his
camp and retired, satisfied with the empty honors of his gasconade.

no sooner had he fairly turned his back, than gonsalvo, whose soldiers had
been restrained with difficulty from sallying out on their insolent foe,
ordered the whole strength of his cavalry under the command of diego de
mendoza, flanked by two corps of infantry, to issue forth and pursue the
french. mendoza executed these orders so promptly that he brought up his
horse, which were somewhat in advance of the foot, on the rear-guard of
the french, before it had got many miles from barleta. the latter
instantly halted to receive the charge of the spaniards, and, after a
lively skirmish of no great duration, mendoza retreated, followed by the
incautious enemy, who, in consequence of their irregular and straggling
march, were detached from the main body of their army. in the mean time,
the advancing columns of the spanish infantry, which had now come up with
the retreating horse, unexpectedly closing on the enemy's flanks, threw
them into some disorder, which became complete when the flying cavalry of
the spaniards, suddenly wheeling round in the rapid style of the moorish
tactics, charged them boldly in front. all was now confusion. some made
resistance, but most sought only to escape; a few effected it, but the
greater part of those who did not fall on the field were carried prisoners
to barleta; where mendoza found the great captain with his whole army
drawn up under the walls in order of battle, ready to support him in
person, if necessary. the whole affair passed so expeditiously, that the
viceroy, who, as has been said, conducted his retreat in a most disorderly
manner, and in fact had already dispersed several battalions of his
infantry to the different towns from which he had drawn them, knew nothing
of the rencontre, till his men were securely lodged within the walls of
barleta. [26]

the arrival of a venetian trader at this time, with a cargo of grain,
brought temporary relief to the pressing necessities of the garrison. [27]
this was followed by the welcome intelligence of the total discomfiture of
the french fleet under m. de prejan by the spanish admiral lezcano, in an
action off otranto, which consequently left the seas open for the supplies
daily expected from sicily. fortune seemed now in the giving vein; for in
a few days a convoy of seven transports from that island, laden with
grain, meat, and other stores, came safe into barleta, and supplied
abundant means for recruiting the health and spirits of its famished
inmates. [28]

thus restored, the spaniards began to look forward with eager confidence
to the achievement of some new enterprise. the temerity of the viceroy
soon afforded an opportunity. the people of castellaneta, a town near
tarento, were driven by the insolent and licentious behavior of the french
garrison to betray the place into the hands of the spaniards. the duke of
nemours, enraged at this defection, prepared to march at once with his
whole force, and take signal vengeance on the devoted little town; and
this, notwithstanding the remonstrances of his officers against a step
which must inevitably expose the unprotected garrisons in the neighborhood
to the assault of their vigilant enemy in barleta. the event justified
these apprehensions. [29]

no sooner had gonsalvo learned the departure of nemours on a distant
expedition, than he resolved at once to make an attack on the town of
ruvo, about twelve miles distant, and defended by the brave la palice,
with a corps of three hundred french lances, and as many foot. with his
usual promptness, the spanish general quitted the walls of barleta the
same night on which he received the news, taking with him his whole
effective force, amounting to about three thousand infantry and one
thousand light and heavy-armed horse. so few, indeed, remained to guard
the city, that he thought it prudent to take some of the principal
inhabitants as hostages to insure its fidelity in his absence.

at break of day, the little army arrived before ruvo. gonsalvo immediately
opened a lively cannonade on the old ramparts, which in less than four
hours effected a considerable breach. he then led his men to the assault,
taking charge himself of those who were to storm the breach, while another
division, armed with ladders for scaling the walls, was intrusted to the
adventurous cavalier diego de paredes.

the assailants experienced more resolute resistance than they had
anticipated from the inconsiderable number of the garrison. la palice,
throwing himself into the breach with his iron band of dismounted
gendarmes, drove back the spaniards as often as they attempted to set foot
on the broken ramparts; while the gascon archery showered down volleys of
arrows thick as hail, from the battlements, on the exposed persons of the
assailants. the latter, however, soon rallied under the eye of their
general, and returned with fresh fury to the charge, until the
overwhelming tide of numbers bore down all opposition, and they poured in
through the breach and over the walls with irresistible fury. the brave
little garrison were driven before them; still, however, occasionally
making fight in the streets and houses. their intrepid young commander, la
palice, retreated facing the enemy, who pressed thick and close upon him,
till, his further progress being arrested by a wall, he placed his back
against it, and kept them at bay, making a wide circle around him with the
deadly sweep of his battle-axe. but the odds were too much for him; and at
length, after repeated wounds, having been brought to the ground by a deep
cut in the head, he was made prisoner; not, however, before he had flung
his sword far over the heads of the assailants, disdaining, in the true
spirit of a knight-errant, to yield it to the rabble around him. [30]

all resistance was now at an end. the women of the place had fled, like so
many frightened deer, to one of the principal churches; and gonsalvo, with
more humanity than was usual in these barbarous wars, placed a guard over
their persons, which effectually secured them from the insults of the
soldiery. after a short time spent in gathering up the booty and securing
his prisoners, the spanish general, having achieved the object of his
expedition, set out on his homeward march, and arrived without
interruption at barleta.

the duke of nemours had scarcely appeared before castellaneta, before he
received tidings of the attack on ruvo. he put himself, without losing a
moment, at the head of his gendarmes, supported by the swiss pikemen,
hoping to reach the beleaguered town in time to raise the siege. great was
his astonishment, therefore, on arriving before it, to find no trace of an
enemy, except the ensigns of spain unfurled from the deserted battlements.
mortified and dejected, be made no further attempt to recover
castellaneta, but silently drew off to hide his chagrin in the walls of
canosa. [31]

among the prisoners were several persons of distinguished rank. gonsalvo
treated them with his usual courtesy, and especially la palice, whom he
provided with his own surgeon and all the appliances for rendering his
situation as comfortable as possible. for the common file, however, he
showed no such sympathy; but condemned them all to serve in the spanish
admiral's galleys, where they continued to the close of the campaign. an
unfortunate misunderstanding had long subsisted between the french and
spanish commanders respecting the ransom and exchange of prisoners; and
gonsalvo was probably led to this severe measure, so different from his
usual clemency, by an unwillingness to encumber himself with a superfluous
population in the besieged city. [32] but, in truth, such a proceeding,
however offensive to humanity, was not at all repugnant to the haughty
spirit of chivalry, which, reserving its courtesies exclusively for those
of gentle blood and high degree, cared little for the inferior orders,
whether soldier or peasant, whom it abandoned without remorse to all the
caprices and cruelties of military license.

the capture of ruvo was attended with important consequences to the
spaniards. besides the valuable booty of clothes, jewels, and money, they
brought back with them nearly a thousand horses, which furnished gonsalvo
with the means of augmenting his cavalry, the small number of which had
hitherto materially crippled his operations. he accordingly selected seven
hundred of his best troops and mounted them on the french horses; thus
providing himself with a corps, burning with zeal to approve itself worthy
of the distinguished honor conferred on it. [33]

a few weeks after, the general received an important accession of strength
from the arrival of two thousand german mercenaries, which don juan
manuel, the spanish minister at the austrian court, had been permitted to
raise in the emperor's dominions. this event determined the great captain
on a step which he had been some time meditating. the new levies placed
him in a condition for assuming the offensive. his stock of provisions,
moreover, already much reduced, would be obviously insufficient long to
maintain his increased numbers. he resolved, therefore, to sally out of
the old walls of barleta, and, availing himself of the high spirits in
which the late successes had put his troops, to bring the enemy at once to
battle. [34]


footnotes

[1] peter martyr, in a letter written from venice, while detained there on
his way to alexandria, speaks of the efforts made by the french emissaries
to induce the republic to break with spain, and support their master in
his designs on naples. "adsunt namque a ludovico rege gallorum oratores,
qui omni nixu conantur a vobis venetorum animos avertere. fremere dentibus
aiunt oratorem primarium gallum, quia nequeat per venetorum suffragia
consequi, ut aperte vobis hostilitatem edicant, utque velint gallis regno
parthenopeo contra vestra praesidia ferre suppetias." the letter is dated
october 1st, 1501. opus epist., epist. 231.

[2] martyr, after noticing the grounds of the partition treaty, comments
with his usual shrewdness on the politic views of the spanish sovereigns.
"facilius namque se sperant, eam partem, quam sibi galli sortiti sunt,
habituros aliquando, quam si universum regnum occuparint." opus epist.,
epist. 218.

[3] the italian historians, who have investigated the subject with some
parade of erudition, treat it so vaguely, as to leave it after all nearly
as perplexed as they found it. giovio includes the capitanate in apulia,
according to the ancient division; guicciardini, according to the modern;
and the spanish historian mariana, according to both. the last writer, it
may be observed, discusses the matter with equal learning and candor, and
more perspicuity than either of the preceding. he admits reasonable
grounds for doubt to which moiety of the kingdom the basilicate and
principalities should be assigned. mariana, hist. de espana, tom. ii. p.
670.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 5, pp. 274, 275.--giovio, vita
magni gonsalvi, lib. 1, pp. 234, 235.

[4] the provision of the partition treaty, that the spaniards should
collect the tolls paid by the flocks on their descent from the french
district of abruzzo into the capitanate, is conclusive evidence of the
intention of the contracting parties to assign the latter to spain. see
the treaty apud dumont, corps diplomatique, tom. in. pp. 445, 446.

[5] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom, i. lib. 4, cap. 52.--mariana,
hist. de espana, tom. ii, lib. 27, cap. 12.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol.
10.

[6] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2, chap. 3-7.--zurita, hist. del
rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 60, 62, 64, 65.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, tom. i. p. 236.--giannone, istoria di napoli, lib. 29, cap. 4.

bernaldez states, that the great captain, finding his conference with the
french general ineffectual, proposed to the latter to decide the quarrel
between their respective nations by single combat. (reyes catolicos, ms.,
cap. 167.) we should require some other authority, however, than that of
the good curate to vouch for this romantic flight, so entirely out of
keeping with the spanish general's character, in which prudence was
probably the most conspicuous attribute.

[7] daru, hist. de venise, tom. iii. p. 345.--bembo, istoria viniziana,
tom. i. lib. 6.--peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 238, 240, 252.--this
may appear strange, considering that lorenzo suarez de la vega was there,
a person of whom gonzalo de oviedo writes, "fue gentil caballero, e sabio,
e de gran prudencia; ***** muy entendido e de mucho reposo e honesto e
afable e de linda conversarcion;" and again more explicitly, "embaxador a
venecia, en el qual oficio sirvio muy bien, e como prudente varon."
(quincuagenas, ms., bat. 1, quinc. 3, dial. 44.) martyr admits his
prudence, but objects his ignorance of latin, a deficiency, however
heinous in the worthy tutor's eyes, probably of no rare occurrence among
the elder castilian nobles.

[8] many of martyr's letters were addressed to both ferdinand and
isabella. the former, however, was ignorant of the latin language, in
which they were written. martyr playfully alludes to this in one of his
epistles, reminding the queen of her promise to interpret them faithfully
to her husband. the unconstrained and familiar tone of his correspondence
affords a pleasing example of the personal intimacy to which the
sovereigns, so contrary to the usual stiffness of spanish etiquette,
admitted men of learning and probity at their court, without distinction
of rank. opus epist., epist. 230.

[9] "galli," says martyr, in a letter more remarkable for strength of
expression than elegance of latinity, "furunt, saeviunt, internecionem
nostris minantur, putantque id sibi fere facillimum. regem eorum esse in
itinere, inquiunt, ut ipse cum duplicato exercitu alpes trajiciat in
italiam. vestro nomini insurgunt. cristas erigunt in vos superbissime.
provinciam hanc, veluti rem humilem, parvique momenti, se aggressuros
praeconantur. nihil esse negotii eradicare exterminareque vestra praesidia
ex utraque sicilia blacterant. insolenter nimis exspuendo insultant." opus
epist., epist. 241.

[10] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2, chap. 8.--giannone, istoria di
napoli, lib. 29, cap. 4.--guicciardini, istoria, lib. 5, pp. 274, 275.--
buonaccorsi, diario, p. 61.

[11] guicciardini, istoria, lib. 5, p. 265.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii.,
part. 1, chap. 57.--gaillard, rivalite, tom. iv. pp. 221-233.--st. gelais,
hist. de louys xii, p. 169.

brantome has introduced sketches of most of the french captains mentioned
in the text into his admirable gallery of national portraits.--see vies
des hommes illustres, oeuvres, tom. ii. and iii.

[12] martyr's epistles at this crisis are filled with expostulation,
argument, and entreaties to the sovereigns, begging them to rouse from
their apathy, and take measures to secure the wavering affections of
venice, as well as to send more effectual aid to their italian troops.
ferdinand listened to the first of these suggestions; but showed a strange
insensibility to the last.

[13] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, lib. 4, cap. 62, 65.--carta del gran
capitan, ms.

prospero colonna, in particular, was distinguished not only for his
military science, but his fondness for letters and the arts, of which he
is commemorated by tiraboschi as a munificent patron. (letteratura
italians, tom. viii. p. 77.) paolo giovio has introduced his portrait
among the effigies of illustrious men, who, it must be confessed, are more
indebted in his work to the hand of the historian than the artist. elogia
virorum bellica virtute illustrium, (basiliae, 1578,) lib. 5.

[14] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2, chap. 8.--ulloa, vita di carlo
v., fol. 10.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 42.--summonte, hist. di
napoli, tom. iii. p. 541.

[15] this beautiful and high-spirited lady, whose fate has led boccalini,
in his whimsical satire of the "ragguagli di parnasso," to call her the
most unfortunate female on record, had seen her father, alfonso ii., and
her husband, galeazzo sforza, driven from their thrones by the french,
while her son still remained in captivity in their hands. no wonder they
revolted from accumulating new woes on her devoted head.

[16] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 237.--guicciardini, istoria, lib.
5, pp. 282, 283.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 14.--peter
martyr, opus epist., epist. 249.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap.
168.

[17] chronica del gran capitan, cap. 47.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando,
tom. i. lib. 4, cap. 69.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, tom. i. p. 241.--
d'auton, part. 2, chap. 11.--peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 247.

martyr says, that the spaniards marched through the enemy's camp, shouting
"espana, espana, viva espana!" (ubi supra.) their gallantry in the defence
of canosa elicits a hearty eulogium from jean d'auton, the loyal
historiographer of louis xii. "je ne veux donc par ma chronique mettre les
biensfaicts des espaignols en publy, mais dire que pour vertueuse defence,
doibuent auoir louange honorable." hist. de louys xii., chap. 11.

[18] bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 169.--ulloa, vita di carlo v.,
fol. 10.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 66.

[19] chronica del gran capitan, cap. 53.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii.,
part. 2, chap. 26.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, pp. 238, 239.--memoires
de bayard par le loyal serviteur, chap. 23, apud petitot, collection des
memoires, tom. xv.--brantome, oeuvres, tom. iii. disc. 77.

this celebrated tourney, its causes, and all the details of the action,
are told in as many different ways as there are narrators; and this,
notwithstanding it was fought in the presence of a crowd of witnesses, who
had nothing to do but look on, and note what passed before their eyes. the
only facts in which all agree, are, that there was such a tournament, and
that neither party gained the advantage. so much for history!

[20] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., ubi supra.--quintana, espanoles
celebres, tom. ii. p. 263.

[21] brantome, oeuvres, tom. vi. discours sur les duels.--d'auton, hist.
de louys xii., part. 2, chap. 27.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 11.--
memoires de bayard, chap. 22, apud collection des memoires.--giovio, vitae
illust. virorum, p. 240.

[22] according to martyr, the besieged had been so severely pressed by
famine for some time before this, that gonsalvo entertained serious
thoughts of embarking the whole of his little garrison on board the fleet,
and abandoning the place to the enemy. "barlettae inclusos fame pesteque
urgeri graviter aiunt. vicina ipsorum omnia galli occupant, et nostros
quotidie magis ac magis premunt. ita obsessi undi que, de relinquenda
etiam barletta saepius iniere consilium. ut mari terga dent hostibus, ne
fame pesteque pereant, saepe cadit in deliberationem." opus epist., epist.
249.

[23] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 242.--zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 4.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap.
167.--guicciardini, istoria, p. 283.

[24] ibid., lib. 5, p. 294.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2, chap.
22.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 63.

[25] ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 11.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum,
tom. i. p. 247.--zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 9.

[26] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, pp. 243, 244.--ulloa, vita di carlo
v., fol. 11, 12. a dispute arose, soon after this affair, between a french
officer and some italian gentlemen at gonsalvo's table, in consequence of
certain injurious reflections made by the former on the bravery of the
italian nation. the quarrel was settled by a combat _a l'outrance_ between
thirteen knights on each side, fought under the protection of the great
captain, who took a lively interest in the success of his allies. it
terminated in the discomfiture and capture of all the french. the tourney
covers more pages in the italian historians than the longest battle, and
is told with pride and a swell of exultation which show that this insult
of the french cut more deeply than all the injuries inflicted by them.
giovio, vitae illust. virorum, pp. 244-247.--guicciardini, istoria, pp.
296-298.--giannone, istoria di napoli, lib. 29, cap. 4.--summonte, hist.
di napoli, tom. iii. pp. 542-552.--et al.

[27]: this supply was owing to the avarice of the french general alegre,
who, having got possession of a magazine of corn in foggia, sold it to the
venetian merchant, instead of reserving it, where it was most needed, for
his own army.

[28] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part, 1, chap. 72.--peter martyr, opus
epist., epist. 254.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 242.

[29] guicciardini, istoria, lib. 5, p. 296.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii.,
part. 2, chap. 31.

[30] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, pp. 248, 249.--guicciardini, istoria,
p. 296.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 175.--d'auton, hist. de
louys xii., part. 2, chap. 31.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 72.

the gallant behavior of la palice, and indeed the whole siege of ruvo, is
told by jean d'auton in a truly heart-stirring tone, quite worthy of the
chivalrous pen of old froissart. there is an inexpressible charm imparted
to the french memoirs and chronicles of this ancient date, not only from
the picturesque character of the details, but from a gentle tinge of
romance shed over them, which calls to mind the doughty feats of

                    "prowest knights,
  both paynim and the peers of charlemagne."

[31] bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., ubi supra.--ulloa, vita di carlo v.,
fol. 16.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 72.

[32] d'auton, hist. de louys xii., ubi supra.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, p. 249.--quintana, espanoles celebres, tom. ii. p. 270.--zurita,
hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 14.

[33] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, p. 249.

[34] garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 15.--zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 16.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 17.




chapter xii.

italian wars.--negotiations with france.--victory of cerignola.--surrender
of naples.

1503.

birth of charles v.--philip and joanna visit spain.--treaty of lyons.--the
great captain refuses to comply with it.--encamps before cerignola.--
battle and rout of the french.--triumphant entry of gonsalvo into naples.


before accompanying the great captain further in his warlike operations,
it will be necessary to take a rapid glance at what was passing in the
french and spanish courts, where negotiations were in train for putting a
stop to them altogether.

the reader has been made acquainted in a preceding chapter with the
marriage of the infanta joanna, second daughter of the catholic
sovereigns, with the archduke philip, son of the emperor maximilian, and
sovereign, in right of his mother, of the low countries. the first fruit
of this marriage was the celebrated charles the fifth, born at ghent,
february 24th, 1500, whose birth was no sooner announced to queen
isabella, than she predicted that to this infant would one day descend the
rich inheritance of the spanish monarchy. [1] the premature death of the
heir apparent, prince miguel, not long after, prepared the way for this
event by devolving the succession on joanna, charles's mother. from that
moment the sovereigns were pressing in their entreaties that the archduke
and his wife would visit spain, that they might receive the customary
oaths of allegiance, and that the former might become acquainted with the
character and institutions of his future subjects. the giddy young prince,
however, thought too much of present pleasure to heed the call of ambition
or duty, and suffered more than a year to glide away, before he complied
with the summons of his royal parents.

in the latter part of 1501, philip and joanna, attended by a numerous
suite of flemish courtiers, set out on their journey, proposing to take
their way through france. they were entertained with profuse magnificence
and hospitality at the french court, where the politic attentions of louis
the twelfth not only effaced the recollection of ancient injuries to the
house of burgundy, [2] but left impressions of the most agreeable
character on the mind of the young prince. [3] after some weeks passed in
a succession of splendid _fetes_ and amusements at blois, where the
archduke confirmed the treaty of trent recently made between his father,
the emperor, and the french king, stipulating the marriage of louis's
eldest daughter, the princess claude, with philip's son charles, the royal
pair resumed their journey towards spain, which they entered by the way of
fontarabia, january 29th, 1502. [4]

magnificent preparations had been made for their reception. the grand
constable of castile, the duke of naxara, and many other of the principal
grandees waited on the borders to receive them. brilliant _fetes_ and
illuminations, and all the usual marks of public rejoicing, greeted their
progress through the principal cities of the north, and a _pragmatica_
relaxing the simplicity, or rather severity, of the sumptuary laws of the
period, so far as to allow the use of silks and various-colored apparel,
shows the attention of the sovereigns to every circumstance, however
trifling, which could affect the minds of the young princes agreeably, and
diffuse an air of cheerfulness over the scene. [5]

ferdinand and isabella, who were occupied with the affairs of andalusia at
this period, no sooner heard of the arrival of philip and joanna, than
they hastened to the north. they reached toledo towards the end of april,
and in a few days, the queen, who paid the usual penalties of royalty, in
seeing her children, one after another, removed far from her into distant
lands, had the satisfaction of again folding her beloved daughter in her
arms.

on the 22d of the ensuing month, the archduke and his wife received the
usual oaths of fealty from the cortes duly convoked for the purpose at
toledo. [6] king ferdinand, not long after, made a journey into aragon, in
which the queen's feeble health would not permit her to accompany him, in
order to prepare the way for a similar recognition by the estates of that
realm. we are not informed what arguments the sagacious monarch made use
of to dispel the scruples formerly entertained by that independent body,
on a similar application in behalf of his daughter, the late queen of
portugal. [7] they were completely successful, however; and philip and
joanna, having ascertained the favorable disposition of cortes, made their
entrance in great state into the ancient city of saragossa, in the month
of october. on the 27th, having first made oath before the justice, to
observe the laws and liberties of the realm, joanna as future queen
proprietor, and philip as her husband,--were solemnly recognized by the
four _arms_ of aragon as successors to the crown, in default of male
issue of king ferdinand. the circumstance is memorable, as affording the
first example of the parliamentary recognition of a female heir apparent
in aragonese history. [8]

amidst all the honors so liberally lavished on philip, his bosom secretly
swelled with discontent, fomented still further by his followers, who
pressed him to hasten his return to flanders, where the free and social
manners of the people were much more congenial to their tastes, than the
reserve and stately ceremonial of the spanish court. the young prince
shared in these feelings, to which, indeed, the love of pleasure, and an
instinctive aversion to anything like serious occupation, naturally
disposed him. ferdinand and isabella saw with regret the frivolous
disposition of their son-in-law, who, in the indulgence of selfish and
effeminate ease, was willing to repose on others all the important duties
of government. they beheld with mortification his indifference to joanna,
who could boast few personal attractions, [9] and who cooled the
affections of her husband by alternations of excessive fondness and
irritable jealousy, for which last the levity of his conduct gave her too
much occasion.

shortly after the ceremony at saragossa, the archduke announced his
intention of an immediate return to the netherlands, by the way of france.
the sovereigns, astonished at this abrupt determination, used every
argument to dissuade him from it. they represented the ill effects it
might occasion the princess joanna, then too far advanced in a state of
pregnancy to accompany him. they pointed out the impropriety, as well as
danger, of committing himself to the hands of the french king, with whom
they were now at open war; and they finally insisted on the importance of
philip's remaining long enough in the kingdom to become familiar with the
usages, and establish himself in the affections of the people over whom he
would one day be called to reign.

all these arguments were ineffectual; the inflexible prince, turning a
deaf ear alike to the entreaties of his unhappy wife, and the
remonstrances of the aragonese cortes, still in session, set out from
madrid, with the whole of his flemish suite, in the month of december. he
left ferdinand and isabella disgusted with the levity of his conduct, and
the queen, in particular, filled with mournful solicitude for the welfare
of the daughter with whom his destinies were united. [10]

before his departure for france, philip, anxious to re-establish harmony
between that country and spain, offered his services to his father-in-law
in negotiating with louis the twelfth, if possible, a settlement of the
differences respecting naples. ferdinand showed some reluctance at
intrusting so delicate a commission to an envoy in whose discretion he
placed small reliance, which was not augmented by the known partiality
which philip entertained for the french monarch. [11] before the archduke
had crossed the frontier, however, he was overtaken by a spanish
ecclesiastic named bernaldo boyl, abbot of st. miguel de cuxa, who brought
full powers to philip from the king for concluding a treaty with france,
accompanied at the same time with private instructions of the most strict
and limited nature. he was enjoined, moreover, to take no step without the
advice of his reverend coadjutor, and to inform the spanish court at once,
if different propositions were submitted from those contemplated by his
instructions. [12] thus fortified, the archduke philip made his appearance
at the french court in lyons, where he was received by louis with the same
lively expressions of regard as before. with these amiable dispositions,
the negotiations were not long in resulting in a definitive treaty,
arranged to the mutual satisfaction of the parties, though in violation of
the private instructions of the archduke. in the progress of the
discussions, ferdinand, according to the spanish historians, received
advices from his envoy, the abate boyl, that philip was transcending his
commission; in consequence of which the king sent an express to france,
urging his son-in-law to adhere to the strict letter of his instructions.
before the messenger reached lyons, however, the treaty was executed. such
is the spanish account of this blind transaction. [13]

the treaty, which was signed at lyons, april 5th, 1503, was arranged on
the basis of the marriage of charles, the infant son of philip, and
claude, princess of france; a marriage, which, settled by three several
treaties, was destined never to take place. the royal infants were
immediately to assume the titles of king and queen of naples, and duke and
duchess of calabria. until the consummation of the marriage, the french
division of the kingdom was to be placed under the administration of some
suitable person named by louis the twelfth, and the spanish under that of
the archduke philip, or some other deputy appointed by ferdinand. all
places unlawfully seized by either party were to be restored; and lastly
it was settled, with regard to the disputed province of the capitanate,
that the portion held by the french should be governed by an agent of king
louis, and the spanish by the archduke philip on behalf of ferdinand. [14]

such in substance was the treaty of lyons; a treaty, which, while it
seemed to consult the interests of ferdinand, by securing the throne of
naples eventually to his posterity, was in fact far more accommodated to
those of louis, by placing the immediate control of the spanish moiety
under a prince over whom that monarch held entire influence. it is
impossible that so shrewd a statesman as ferdinand could, from the mere
consideration of advantages so remote to himself and dependent on so
precarious a contingency as the marriage of two infants, then in their
cradles, have seriously contemplated an arrangement, which surrendered all
the actual power into the hands of his rival; and that too at the moment
when his large armament, so long preparing for calabria, had reached that
country, and when the great captain, on the other quarter, had received
such accessions of strength as enabled him to assume the offensive, on at
least equal terms with the enemy.

no misgivings on this head, however, appeared to have entered the minds of
the signers of the treaty, which was celebrated by the court at lyons with
every show of public rejoicing, and particularly with tourneys and tilts
of reeds, in imitation of the spanish chivalry. at the same time, the
french king countermanded the embarkation of french troops on board a
fleet equipping at the port of genoa for naples, and sent orders to his
generals in italy to desist from further operations. the archduke
forwarded similar instructions to gonsalvo, accompanied with a copy of the
powers intrusted to him by ferdinand. that prudent officer, however,
whether in obedience to previous directions from the king, as spanish
writers affirm, or on his own responsibility, from a very natural sense of
duty, refused to comply with the ambassador's orders; declaring "he knew
no authority but that of his own sovereigns, and that he felt bound to
prosecute the war with all his ability, till he received their commands to
the contrary." [15]

indeed, the archduke's despatches arrived at the very time when the
spanish general, having strengthened himself by a reinforcement from the
neighboring garrison of tarento under pedro navarro, was prepared to sally
forth, and try his fortune in battle with the enemy. without further
delay, he put his purpose into execution, and on friday, the 28th of
april, marched out with his whole army from the ancient walls of barleta;
a spot ever memorable in history as the scene of the extraordinary
sufferings and indomitable constancy of the spanish soldier.

the road lay across the field of cannae, where, seventeen centuries
before, the pride of rome had been humbled by the victorious arms of
hannibal, [16] in a battle which, though fought with far greater numbers,
was not so decisive in its consequences as that which the same scenes were
to witness in a few hours. the coincidence is certainly singular; and one
might almost fancy that the actors in these fearful tragedies, unwilling
to deface the fair haunts of civilization, had purposely sought a more
fitting theatre in this obscure and sequestered region.

the weather, although only at the latter end of april, was extremely
sultry; the troops, notwithstanding gonsalvo's orders on crossing the
river ofanto, the ancient aufidus, had failed to supply themselves with
sufficient water for the march; parched with heat and dust, they were soon
distressed by excessive thirst; and, as the burning rays of the noontide
sun beat fiercely on their heads, many of them, especially those cased in
heavy armor, sunk down on the road, fainting with exhaustion and fatigue.
gonsalvo was seen in every quarter, administering to the necessities of
his men, and striving to reanimate their drooping spirits. at length, to
relieve them, he commanded that each trooper should take one of the
infantry on his crupper, setting the example himself by mounting a german
ensign behind him on his own horse.

in this way, the whole army arrived early in the afternoon before
cerignola, a small town on an eminence about sixteen miles from barleta,
where the nature of the ground afforded the spanish general a favorable
position for his camp. the sloping sides of the hill were covered with
vineyards, and its base was protected by a ditch of considerable depth.
gonsalvo saw at once the advantages of the ground. his men were jaded by
the march; but there was no time to lose, as the french, who, on his
departure from barleta, had been drawn up under the walls of canosa, were
now rapidly advancing. all hands were put in requisition, therefore, for
widening the trench, in which they planted sharp-pointed stakes; while the
earth which they excavated enabled them to throw up a parapet of
considerable height on the side next the town. on this rampart he mounted
his little train of artillery, consisting of thirteen guns, and behind it
drew up his forces in order of battle. [17]

before these movements were completed in the spanish camp, the bright arms
and banners of the french were seen glistening in the distance amid the
tall fennel and cane-brakes with which the country was thickly covered. as
soon as they had come in view of the spanish encampment, they were brought
to a halt, while a council of war was called, to determine the expediency
of giving battle that evening. the duke of nemours would have deferred it
till the following morning, as the day was already far spent, and allowed
no time for reconnoitring the position of his enemy. but ives d'allegre,
chandieu, the commander of the swiss, and some other officers, were for
immediate action, representing the importance of not balking the
impatience of the soldiers, who were all hot for the assault. in the
course of the debate, allegre was so much heated as to throw out some rash
taunts on the courage of the viceroy, which the latter would have avenged
on the spot, had not his arm been arrested by louis d'ars. he had the
weakness, however, to suffer them to change his cooler purpose,
exclaiming, "we will fight to-night, then; and perhaps those who vaunt the
loudest will be found to trust more to their spurs, than their swords;" a
prediction bitterly justified by the event. [18]

while this dispute was going on, gonsalvo gained time for making the
necessary disposition of his troops. in the centre he placed his german
auxiliaries, armed with their long pikes, and on each wing the spanish
infantry under the command of pedro navarro, diego de paredes, pizarro,
and other illustrious captains. the defence of the artillery was committed
to the left wing. a considerable body of men-at-arms, including those
recently equipped from the spoils of ruvo, was drawn up within the
intrenchments, in a quarter affording a convenient opening for a sally,
and placed under the orders of mendoza and fabrizio colonna, whose brother
prospero and pedro de la paz took charge of the light cavalry, which was
posted without the lines to annoy the advance of the enemy, and act on any
point, as occasion might require. having completed his preparations, the
spanish general coolly waited the assault of the french.

the duke of nemours had marshalled his forces in a very different order.
he distributed them into three battles or divisions, stationing his heavy
horse, composing altogether, as gonsalvo declared, "the finest body of
cavalry seen for many years in italy," under the command of louis d'ars,
on the right. the second and centre division, formed somewhat in the rear
of the right, was made up of the swiss and gascon infantry, headed by the
brave chandieu; and his left, consisting chiefly of his light cavalry, and
drawn up, like the last, somewhat in the rear of the preceding, was
intrusted to allegre. [19]

it was within half an hour of sunset when the duke de nemours gave orders
for the attack, and, putting himself at the head of the gendarmerie on the
right, spurred at full gallop against the spanish left. the hostile armies
were nearly equal, amounting to between six and seven thousand men each.
the french were superior in the number and condition of their cavalry,
rising to a third of their whole force; while gonsalvo's strength lay
chiefly in his infantry, which had acquired a lesson of tactics under him,
that raised it to a level with the best in europe.

as the french advanced, the guns on the spanish left poured a lively fire
into their ranks, when, a spark accidentally communicating with the
magazine of powder, the whole blew up with a tremendous explosion. the
spaniards were filled with consternation; but gonsalvo, converting the
misfortune into a lucky omen, called out, "courage, soldiers, these are
the beacon lights of victory! we have no need of our guns at close
quarters."

in the mean time, the french van under nemours, advancing rapidly under
the dark clouds of smoke, which rolled heavily over the field, were
unexpectedly brought up by the deep trench, of whose existence they were
unapprised. some of the horse were precipitated into it, and all received
a sudden check, until nemours, finding it impossible to force the works in
this quarter, rode along their front in search of some practicable
passage. in doing this, he necessarily exposed his flank to the fatal aim
of the spanish arquebusiers. a shot from one of them took effect on the
unfortunate young nobleman, and he fell mortally wounded from his saddle.

at this juncture, the swiss and gascon infantry, briskly moving up to
second the attack of the now disordered horse, arrived before the
intrenchments. undismayed by this formidable barrier, their commander,
chandieu, made the most desperate attempts to force a passage; but the
loose earth freshly turned up afforded no hold to the feet, and his men
were compelled to recoil from the dense array of german pikes, which
bristled over the summit of the breastwork. chandieu, their leader, made
every effort to rally and bring them back to the charge; but, in the act
of doing this, was hit by a ball, which stretched him lifeless in the
ditch; his burnished arms, and the snow-white plumes above his helmet,
making him a conspicuous mark for the enemy.

all was now confusion. the spanish arquebusiers, screened by their
defences, poured a galling fire into the dense masses of the enemy, who
were mingled together indiscriminately, horse and foot, while, the leaders
being down, no one seemed capable of bringing them to order. at this
critical moment, gonsalvo, whose eagle eye took in the whole operations of
the field, ordered a general charge along the line; and the spaniards,
leaping their intrenchments, descended with the fury of an avalanche on
their foes, whose wavering columns, completely broken by the violence of
the shock, were seized with a panic, and fled, scarcely offering any
resistance. louis d'ars, at the head of such of the men-at-arms as could
follow him, went off in one direction, and ives d'allegre, with his light
cavalry, which had hardly come into action, in another; thus fully
verifying the ominous prediction of his commander. the slaughter fell most
heavily on the swiss and gascon foot, whom the cavalry under mendoza and
pedro de la paz rode down and cut to pieces without sparing, till the
shades of evening shielded them at length from their pitiless pursuers.
[20]

prospero colonna pushed on to the french encampment, where he found the
tables in the duke's tent spread for his evening repast; of which the
italian general and his followers did not fail to make good account. a
trifling incident, that well illustrates the sudden reverses of war.

the great captain passed the night on the field of battle, which, on the
following morning, presented a ghastly spectacle of the dying and the
dead. more than three thousand french are computed by the best accounts to
have fallen. the loss of the spaniards, covered as they were by their
defences, was inconsiderable. [21] all the enemy's artillery, consisting
of thirteen pieces, his baggage, and most of his colors fell into their
hands. never was there a more complete victory, achieved too within the
space of little more than an hour. the body of the unfortunate nemours,
which was recognized by one of his pages from the rings on the fingers,
was found under a heap of slain, much disfigured. it appeared that he had
received three several wounds, disproving, if need were, by his honorable
death the injurious taunts of allegre. gonsalvo was affected even to tears
at beholding the mutilated remains of his young and gallant adversary,
who, whatever judgment may be formed of his capacity as a leader, was
allowed to have all the qualities which belong to a true knight. with him
perished the last scion of the illustrious house of armagnac. gonsalvo
ordered his remains to be conveyed to barleta, where they were laid in the
cemetery of the convent of st. francis, with all the honors due to his
high station. [22]

the spanish commander lost no time in following up his blow, well aware
that it is quite as difficult to improve a victory as to win one. the
french had rushed into battle with too much precipitation to agree on any
plan of operations, or any point on which to rally in case of defeat. they
accordingly scattered in different directions, and pedro de la paz was
despatched in pursuit of louis d'ars, who threw himself into venosa, [23]
where he kept the enemy at bay for many months longer. paredes kept close
on the scent of allegre, who, finding the gates shut against him wherever
he passed, at length took shelter in gaeta on the extreme point of the
neapolitan territory. there he endeavored to rally the scattered relics of
the field of cerignola, and to establish a strong position, from which the
french, when strengthened by fresh supplies from home, might recommence
operations for the recovery of the kingdom.

the day after the battle of cerignola the spaniards received tidings of
another victory, scarcely less important, gained over the french in
calabria, the preceding week. [24] the army sent out under portocarrero
had reached that coast early in march; but, soon after its arrival, its
gallant commander fell ill and died. [25] the dying general named don
fernando de andrada as his successor; and this officer, combining his
forces with those before in the country under cardona and benavides,
encountered the french commander d'aubigny in a pitched battle, not far
from seminara, on friday, the 21st of april. it was near the same spot on
which the latter had twice beaten the spaniards. but the star of france
was on the wane; and the gallant old officer had the mortification to see
his little corps of veterans completely routed after a sharp engagement of
less than an hour, while he himself was retrieved with difficulty from the
hands of the enemy by the valor of his scottish guard. [26]

the great captain and his army, highly elated with the news of this
fortunate event, which annihilated the french power in calabria, began
their march on naples; fabrizio colonna having been first detached into
the abruzzi to receive the submission of the people in that quarter. the
tidings of the victory had spread far and wide; and, as gonsalvo's army
advanced, they beheld the ensigns of aragon floating from the battlements
of the towns upon their route, while the inhabitants came forth to greet
the conqueror, eager to testify their devotion to the spanish cause. the
army halted at benevento; and the general sent his summons to the city of
naples, inviting it in the most courteous terms to resume its ancient
allegiance to the legitimate branch of aragon. it was hardly to be
expected, that the allegiance of a people, who had so long seen their
country set up as a mere stake for political gamesters, should sit very
closely upon them, or that they should care to peril their lives on the
transfer of a crown which had shifted on the heads of half a dozen
proprietors in as many successive years. [27] with the same ductile
enthusiasm, therefore, with which they greeted the accession of charles
the eighth or louis the twelfth, they now welcomed the restoration of the
ancient dynasty of aragon; and deputies from the principal nobility and
citizens waited on the great captain at acerra, where they tendered him
the keys of the city, and requested the confirmation of their rights and
privileges.

gonsalvo, having promised this in the name of his royal master, on the
following morning, the 14th of may, 1503, made his entrance in great state
into the capital, leaving his army without the walls. he was escorted by
the military of the city under a royal canopy borne by the deputies. the
streets were strewed with flowers, the edifices decorated with appropriate
emblems and devices, and wreathed with banners emblazoned with the united
arms of aragon and naples. as he passed along, the city rung with the
acclamations of countless multitudes who thronged the streets; while every
window and housetop was filled with spectators, eager to behold the man,
who, with scarcely any other resources than those of his own genius, had
so long defied, and at length completely foiled, the power of france.

on the following day a deputation of the nobility and people waited on the
great captain at his quarters, and tendered him the usual oaths of
allegiance for his master, king ferdinand, whose accession finally closed
the series of revolutions which had so long agitated this unhappy country.
[28]

the city of naples was commanded by two strong fortresses still held by
the french, which, being well victualled and supplied with ammunition,
showed no disposition to surrender. the great captain determined,
therefore, to reserve a small corps for their reduction, while he sent
forward the main body of his army to besiege gaeta. but the spanish
infantry refused to march until the heavy arrears, suffered to accumulate
through the negligence of the government, were discharged; and gonsalvo,
afraid of awakening the mutinous spirit which he had once found it so
difficult to quell, was obliged to content himself with sending forward
his cavalry and german levies, and to permit the infantry to take up its
quarters in the capital, under strict orders to respect the persons and
property of the citizens.

he now lost no time in pressing the siege of the french fortresses, whose
impregnable situation might have derided the efforts of the most
formidable enemy in the ancient state of military science. but the
reduction of these places was intrusted to pedro navarro, the celebrated
engineer, whose improvements in the art of mining have gained him the
popular reputation of being its inventor, and who displayed such
unprecedented skill on this occasion, as makes it a memorable epoch in the
annals of war. [29]

under his directions, the small tower of st. vincenzo having been first
reduced by a furious cannonade, a mine was run under the outer defences of
the great fortress called castel nuovo. on the 21st of may, the mine was
sprung; a passage was opened over the prostrate ramparts, and the
assailants, rushing in with gonsalvo and navarro at their head, before the
garrison had time to secure the drawbridge, applied their ladders to the
walls of the castle, and succeeded in carrying the place by escalade,
after a desperate struggle, in which the greater part of the french were
slaughtered. an immense booty was found in the castle. the angevin party
had made it a place of deposit for their most valuable effects, gold,
jewels, plate, and other treasures, which, together with its well-stored
magazines of grain and ammunition, became the indiscriminate spoil of the
victors. as some of these, however, complained of not getting their share
of the plunder, gonsalvo, giving full scope in the exultation of the
moment to military license, called out gayly, "make amends for it, then,
by what you can find in my quarters!" the words were not uttered to deaf
ears. the mob of soldiery rushed to the splendid palace of the angevin
prince of salerno, then occupied by the great captain, and in a moment its
sumptuous furniture, paintings, and other costly decorations, together
with the contents of its generous cellar, were seized and appropriated
without ceremony by the invaders, who thus indemnified themselves at their
general's expense for the remissness of government.

after some weeks of protracted operations, the remaining fortress, castel
d'uovo, as it was called, opened its gates to navarro; and a french fleet,
coming into the harbor, had the mortification to find itself fired on from
the walls of the place it was intended to relieve. before this event,
gonsalvo, having obtained funds from spain for paying off his men, quitted
the capital and directed his march on gaeta. the important results of his
victories were now fully disclosed. d'aubigny, with the wreck of the
forces escaped from seminara, had surrendered. the two abruzzi, the
capitanate, all the basilicate, except venosa, still held by louis d'ars,
and indeed every considerable place in the kingdom, had tendered its
submission, with the exception of gaeta. summoning, therefore, to his aid
andrada, navarro, and his other officers, the great captain resolved to
concentrate all his strength on this point, designing to press the siege,
and thus exterminate at a blow the feeble remains of the french power in
italy. the enterprise was attended with more difficulty than he had
anticipated. [30]


footnotes

[1] carbajal, anales, ms., ano 1500.--sandoval, hist. del emp. carlos v.,
tom. i. p. 2.

the queen expressed herself in the language of scripture. "sora cecidit
super mathiam," in allusion to the circumstance of charles being born on
that saint's day; a day which, if we are to believe garibay, was fortunate
to him through the whole course of his life. compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19,
cap. 9.

[2] charles viii., louis's predecessor, had contrived to secure the hand
of anne of bretagne, notwithstanding she was already married by proxy to
philip's father, the emperor maximilian; and this, too, in contempt of his
own engagements to margaret, the emperor's daughter, to whom he had been
affianced from her infancy. this twofold insult, which sunk deep into the
heart of maximilian, seems to have made no impression on the volatile
spirits of his son.

[3] mariana, hist. de espana, lib. 27, cap. 11.--st. gelais describes the
cordial reception of philip and joanna by the court at blois, where he was
probably present himself. the historian shows his own opinion of the
effect produced on their young minds by these flattering attentions, by
remarking, "le roy leur monstra si tres grand semblant d'amour, que par
noblesse et honestete de coeur _il les obligeoit envers luy de leur en
souvenir toute leur vie_." hist. de louys. xii., pp. 164, 165.

in passing through paris, philip took his seat in parliament as peer of
france, and subsequently did homage to louis xii., as his suzerain for his
estates in flanders; an acknowledgment of inferiority not at all palatable
to the spanish historians, who insist with much satisfaction on the
haughty refusal of his wife, the archduchess, to take part in the
ceremony. zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 4, cap. 55.--carbajal, anales, ms.,
ano 1502.--abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 1.--
dumont, corps diplomatique, tom. iv. part. 1, p. 17.

[4] carbajal, anales, ms., ano 1501.--sandoval, hist. del emp. carlos v.,
tom. i. p. 5.

[5] zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 4, cap. 55.--ferreras, hist. d'espagne,
tom. viii. p. 220.

this extreme simplicity of attire, in which zurita discerns "the modesty
of the times," was enforced by laws, the policy of which, whatever be
thought of their moral import, may well be doubted in an economical view.
i shall have occasion to draw the reader's attention to them hereafter.

[6] the writ is dated at llerena, march 8. it was extracted by marina from
the archives of toledo, teoria, tom. ii. p. 18.

[7] it is remarkable that the aragonese writers, generally so inquisitive
on all points touching the constitutional history of their country, should
have omitted to notice the grounds on which the cortes thought proper to
reverse its former decision in the analogous case of the infanta isabella.
there seems to have been even less reason for departing from ancient usage
in the present instance, since joanna had a son, to whom the cortes might
lawfully have tendered its oath of recognition; for a female, although
excluded from the throne in her own person, was regarded as competent to
transmit the title unimpaired to her male heirs. blancas suggests no
explanation of the affair, (coronaciones, lib. 3, cap. 20, and
commentarii, pp. 274, 511,) and zurita quietly dismisses it with the
remark, that "there was some opposition raised, but _the king had managed
it so discreetly beforehand_, that there was not the same difficulty as
formerly." (hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 5.) it is curious
to see with what effrontery the prothonotary of the cortes, in the desire
to varnish over the departure from constitutional precedent, declares, in
the opening address, "the princess joanna, true and lawful heir to the
crown, to whom, in default of male heirs, the usage and law of the land
require the oath of allegiance." coronaciones, ubi supra.

[8] carbajal, anales, ms., ano 1500.--abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii.
rey 30, cap. 12, sec. 6.--robles, vita de ximenez, p. 126.--garibay,
compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 14.--sandoval, hist. del emp. carlos v.,
tom. i. p. 5.

petronilla, the only female who ever sat, in her own right, on the throne
of aragon, never received the homage of cortes as heir apparent; the
custom not having been established at that time, the middle of the twelfth
century. (zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 5.) blancas has described
the ceremony of joanna's recognition with quite as much circumstantiality
as the novelty of the case could warrant. coronaciones, lib. 3, cap. 20.

[9] "simplex est foemina," says martyr, speaking of joanna, "licet a tanta
muliere progenita." opus epist., epist. 250.

[10] peter martyr, opus epist., ubi supra.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib.
5, cap. 10.--gomez, de rebus gestis, fol. 44.--carbajal, anales, ms., ano
1502.

[11] such manifest partiality for the french court and manners was shown
by philip and his flemish followers, that the spaniards very generally
believed the latter were in the pay of louis xii. see gomez, de rebus
gestis, fol. 44.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 23.--peter martyr,
opus epist., epist. 253.--lanuza, historias, cap. 16.

[12] zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 10.--abarca, reyes de aragon,
tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 2.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19,
cap. 15.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 1, chap. 32.

[13] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 23.--st. gelais,
hist. de louys xii., pp. 170, 171.--claude de seyssel, histoire de louys
xii., (paris, 1615,) p. 108.--abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30,
cap. 13, sec. 3.--mariana, hist. de espana, tom. ii. pp. 690, 691.--
lanuza, historias, tom. i. cap. 16.

some of the french historians speak of two agents besides philip employed
in the negotiations. father boyl is the only one named by the spanish
writers, as regularly commissioned for the purpose, although it is not
improbable that gralla, the resident minister at louis's court, took part
in the discussions.

[14] see the treaty, apud dumont, corps diplomatique, tom. iv. pp. 27-29.

[15] abarca, reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 33, sec. 3.--giannone,
istoria di napoli, lib. 29, cap. 4.--st. gelais, hist. de louys xii., p.
171.--buonaccorsi, diario, p. 75.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2,
chap. 32.

according to the aragonese historians, ferdinand, on the archduke's
departure, informed gonsalvo of the intended negotiations with france,
cautioning the general at the same time not to heed any instructions of
the archduke till confirmed by him. this circumstance the french writers
regard as unequivocal proof of the king's insincerity in entering into the
negotiation. it wears this aspect at first, certainly; but, on a nearer
view, admits of a very different construction. ferdinand had no confidence
in the discretion of his envoy, whom, if we are to believe the spanish
writers, he employed in the affair more from accident than choice; and,
notwithstanding the full powers intrusted to him, he did not consider
himself bound to recognize the validity of any treaty which the other
should sign, until first ratified by himself. with these views, founded on
principles now universally recognized in european diplomacy, it was
natural to caution his general against any unauthorized interference on
the part of his envoy, which the rash and presumptuous character of the
latter, acting, moreover, under an undue influence of the french monarch,
gave him good reason to fear.

as to the great captain, who has borne a liberal share of censure on this
occasion, it is not easy to see how he could have acted otherwise than he
did, even in the event of no special instructions from ferdinand. for he
would scarcely have been justified in abandoning a sure prospect of
advantage on the authority of one, the validity of whose powers he could
not determine, and which, in fact, do not appear to have warranted such
interference. the only authority he knew, was that from which he held his
commission, and to which he was responsible for the faithful discharge of
it.

[16] neither polybius (lib. 3, sec. 24 et seq.) nor livy, (hist., lib. 22,
cap. 43-50,) who give the most circumstantial narratives of the battle,
are precise enough to enable us to ascertain the exact spot in which it
was fought. strabo, in his topographical notices of this part of italy,
briefly alludes to "the affair of cannae" (_ta peri kannas_), without
any description of the scene of action. (geog., lib. 6, p. 285.) cluverius
fixes the site of the ancient cannae on the right bank of the anfidus, the
modern ofanto, between three and four miles below canusium; and notices
the modern hamlet of nearly the same name, canne, where common tradition
recognizes the ruins of the ancient town. (italia antiqua, lib. 4, cap.
12, sec. 8.) d'anville makes no difficulty in identifying these two,
(geographie ancienne abregee, tom. i. p. 208,) having laid down the
ancient town in his maps in the direct line, and about midway, between
barleta and cerignola.

[17] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 253-255.--guicciardini, istoria,
lib. 5, p. 303.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 75, 76.--zurita, anales,
tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 27.--peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 256.--ulloa,
vita di carlo v., fol. 16, 17.

giovio says, that he had heard fabrizio colonna remark more than once, in
allusion to the intrenchments at the base of the hill, "that the victory
was owing, not to the skill of the commander, nor the valor of the troops,
but to a mound and a ditch." this ancient mode of securing a position,
which had fallen into disuse, was revived after this, according to the
same author, and came into general practice among the best captains of the
age. ubi supra.

[18] brantome, oeuvres, tom. ii. disc. 8.--garnier, histoire de france,
(paris, 1783-8,) tom. v. pp. 395, 396.--gaillard, rivalite, tom. iv. p.
244.--st. gelais, hist. de louys xii., p. 171.

[19] chronica del gran capitan, cap. 76.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum,
fol. 253-255.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 17.

[20] chronica del gran capitan, cap. 75.--garnier, hist. de france, tom.
v. pp. 396, 397.--fleurange, memoires, chap. 5, apud petitot, collection
des memoires, tom. xvi.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, ubi supra.--
guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. pp. 303, 304.--st. gelais, hist. de louys
xii., pp. 171, 172.--brantome, oeuvres, tom. ii. disc. 8.

[21] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 255.--garibay, compendio, tom.
ii. lib. 19, cap. 15.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 180.--peter
martyr, opus epist., epist. 256.--fleurange, memoires, chap. 5.

no account, that i know of, places the french loss so low as 3000; garibay
raises it to 4500, and the french marechal de fleurange rates that of the
swiss alone at 5000; a round exaggeration, not readily accounted for, as
he had undoubted access to the best means of information. the spaniards
were too well screened to sustain much injury, and no estimate makes it
more than a hundred killed, and some considerable less. the odds are
indeed startling, but not impossible; as the spaniards were not much
exposed by personal collision with the enemy, until the latter were thrown
into too much disorder to think of anything but escape. the more than
usual confusion and discrepancy in the various statements of the
particulars of this action may probably be attributed to the lateness of
the hour, and consequently imperfect light, in which it was fought.

[22] quintana, espanoles celebres, tom i. p. 277.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, fol. 255.--ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom. viii. pp. 248, 249.--
ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 17.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap.
181.

[23] it was to this same city of venusium that the rash and unfortunate
varro made his retreat, some seventeen centuries before, from the bloody
field of cannae. liv. hist., lib. 22, cap. 49.

[24] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 255.--peter martyr, opus epist.,
epist. 256.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 80.

friday, says guicciardini, alluding no doubt to columbus's discoveries, as
well as these two victories, was observed to be a lucky day to the
spaniards; according to gaillard, it was regarded from this time by the
french with more superstitious dread than ever. istoria, tom. i. p. 301.--
rivalite, tom. iv. p. 348.

[25] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 8, 24.--giovio,
vitae illust. virorum, fol. 250.

the reader may perhaps recollect the distinguished part played in the
moorish war by luis portocarrero, lord of palma. he was of noble italian
origin, being descended from the ancient genoese house of boccanegra. the
great captain and he had married sisters; and this connection probably
recommended him, as much as his military talents, to the calabrian
command, which it was highly important should be intrusted to one who
would maintain a good understanding with the commander-in-chief; a thing
not easy to secure among the haughty nobility of castile.

[26] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 255.--peter martyr, opus epist.,
epist. 256.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 80.--varillas, histoire de
louis xii. (paris, 1688,) tom. i. pp. 289-292. see the account of
d'aubigny's victories at seminara, in part ii. chapters 2 and 11, of this
history.

[27] since 1494 the sceptre of naples had passed into the hands of no less
than seven princes, ferdinand i., alfonso ii., ferdinand ii., charles
viii., frederic iii., louis xii., ferdinand the catholic. no private
estate in the kingdom in the same time had probably changed masters half
so often. see cartas del gran capitan, ms.

[28] guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. p. 304.--giannone, istoria di napoli,
lib. 29, cap. 4.--ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom. viii. p. 250.--summonte,
hist. di napoli, tom. iii. pp. 552, 553.--muratori, annali d'italia, tom.
xiv. p. 40.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 81.--ulloa, vita di carlo v.,
fol. 18.

[29] the italians, in their admiration of pedro navarro, caused medals to
be struck, on which the invention of mines was ascribed to him. (marini,
apud daru, hist. de venise, tom. iii. p. 351.) although not actually the
inventor, his glory was scarcely less, since he was the first who
discovered the extensive and formidable uses to which they might be
applied in the science of destruction. see part i. chapter 13, note 23, of
this history.

[30] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 30, 31, 34, 35.
--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 255-257.--garibay, compendio, tom.
ii. lib. 19, cap. 15.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 183.--
guicciardini, istoria, lib. 6, pp. 307-309.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol.
18, 19.--ammirato, istorie florentine, tom. iii. p. 271.-summonte, hist.
di napoli, tom. iii. p. 554.--chronica del gran capitan, cap. 84, 86, 87,
93, 95.--sismondi, hist. des francais, tom. xv. pp. 407-409.




chapter xiii.

negotiations with france.--unsuccessful invasion of spain.--truce.

1503.

ferdinand's policy examined.--first symptoms of joanna's insanity.--
isabella's distress and fortitude.--efforts of france.--siege of salsas.--
isabella's levies.--ferdinand's successes.--reflections on the campaign.


the events noticed in the preceding chapter glided away as rapidly as the
flitting phantoms of a dream. scarcely had louis the twelfth received the
unwelcome intelligence of gonsalvo de cordova's refusal to obey the
mandate of the archduke philip, before he was astounded with the tidings
of the victory of cerignola, the march on naples, and the surrender of
that capital, as well as of the greater part of the kingdom, following one
another in breathless succession. it seemed as if the very means on which
the french king had so confidently relied for calming the tempest, had
been the signal for awakening all its fury, and bringing it on his devoted
head. mortified and incensed at being made the dupe of what he deemed a
perfidious policy, he demanded an explanation of the archduke, who was
still in france. the latter, vehemently protesting his own innocence,
felt, or affected to feel, so sensibly the ridiculous and, as it appeared,
dishonorable part played by him in the transaction, that he was thrown
into a severe illness, which confined him to his bed for several days. [1]
without delay, he wrote to the spanish court in terms of bitter
expostulation, urging the immediate ratification of the treaty made
pursuant to its orders, and an indemnification to france for its
subsequent violation. such is the account given by the french historians.

the spanish writers, on the other hand, say, that before the news of
gonsalvo's successes reached spain, king ferdinand refused to confirm the
treaty sent him by his son-in-law, until it had undergone certain material
modifications. if the spanish monarch hesitated to approve the treaty in
the doubtful posture of his affairs, he was little likely to do so, when
he had the game entirely in his own hands. [2]

he postponed an answer to philip's application, willing probably to gain
time for the great captain to strengthen himself firmly in his recent
acquisitions. at length, after a considerable interval, he despatched an
embassy to france, announcing his final determination never to ratify a
treaty made in contempt of his orders, and so clearly detrimental to his
interests. he endeavored, however, to gain further time by spinning out
the negotiation, holding up for this purpose the prospect of an ultimate
accommodation, and suggesting the re-establishment of his kinsman, the
unfortunate frederic, on the neapolitan throne, as the best means of
effecting it. the artifice, however, was too gross even for the credulous
louis; who peremptorily demanded of the ambassadors the instant and
absolute ratification of the treaty, and, on their declaring it was beyond
their powers, ordered them at once to leave his court. "i had rather,"
said he, "suffer the loss of a kingdom, which may perhaps be retrieved,
than the loss of honor, which never can." a noble sentiment, but falling
with no particular grace from the lips of louis the twelfth. [3]

the whole of this blind transaction is stated in so irreconcilable a
manner by the historians of the different nations, that it is extremely
difficult to draw anything like a probable narrative out of them. the
spanish writers assert that the public commission of the archduke was
controlled by strict private instructions; [4] while the french, on the
other hand, are either silent as to the latter, or represent them to have
been as broad and unlimited as his credentials. [5] if this be true, the
negotiations must be admitted to exhibit, on the part of ferdinand, as
gross an example of political jugglery and falsehood, as ever disgraced
the annals of diplomacy. [6]

but it is altogether improbable, as i have before remarked, that a monarch
so astute and habitually cautious should have intrusted unlimited
authority, in so delicate a business, to a person whose discretion,
independent of his known partiality for the french monarch, he held so
lightly. it is much more likely that he limited, as is often done, the
full powers committed to him in public, by private instructions of the
most explicit character; and that the archduke was betrayed by his own
vanity, and perhaps ambition (for the treaty threw the immediate power
into his own hands), into arrangements unwarranted by the tenor of these
instructions. [7]

if this were the case, the propriety of ferdinand's conduct in refusing
the ratification depends on the question how far a sovereign is bound by
the acts of a plenipotentiary who departs from his private instructions.
formerly, the question would seem to have been unsettled. indeed, some of
the most respectable writers on public law in the beginning of the
seventeenth century maintain, that such a departure would not justify the
prince in withholding his ratification; deciding thus, no doubt, on
principles of natural equity, which appear to require that a principal
should be held responsible for the acts of an agent, coming within the
scope of his powers, though at variance with his secret orders, with which
the other contracting party can have no acquaintance or concern. [8]

the inconvenience, however, arising from adopting a principle in political
negotiations, which must necessarily place the destinies of a whole nation
in the hands of a single individual, rash or incompetent, it may be,
without the power of interference or supervision on the part of the
government, has led to a different conclusion in practice; and it is now
generally admitted by european writers, not merely that the exchange of
ratifications is essential to the validity of a treaty, but that a
government is not bound to ratify the doings of a minister who has
transcended his private instructions. [9]

but, whatever be thought of ferdinand's good faith in the early stages of
this business, there is no doubt that, at a later period, when his
position was changed by the success of his arms in italy, he sought only
to amuse the french court with a show of negotiation, in order, as we have
already intimated, to paralyze its operations and gain time for securing
his conquests. the french writers inveigh loudly against this crafty and
treacherous policy; and louis the twelfth gave vent to his own indignation
in no very measured terms. but, however we may now regard it, it was in
perfect accordance with the trickish spirit of the age; and the french
king resigned all right of rebuking his antagonist on this score, when he
condescended to become a party with him to the infamous partition treaty,
and still more when he so grossly violated it. he had voluntarily engaged
with his spanish rival in the game, and it afforded no good ground of
complaint, that he was the least adroit of the two.

while ferdinand was thus triumphant in his schemes of foreign policy and
conquest, his domestic life was clouded with the deepest anxiety, in
consequence of the declining health of the queen, and the eccentric
conduct of his daughter, the infanta joanna. we have already seen the
extravagant fondness with which that princess, notwithstanding her
occasional sallies of jealousy, doated on her young and handsome husband.
[10] from the hour of his departure she had been plunged in the deepest
dejection, sitting day and night with her eyes fixed on the ground, in
uninterrupted silence, or broken only by occasional expressions of
petulant discontent. she refused all consolation, thinking only of
rejoining her absent lord, and "equally regardless," says martyr, who was
then at the court, "of herself, her future subjects, and her afflicted
parents." [11]

on the 10th of march, 1503, she was delivered of her second son, who
received the baptismal name of ferdinand, in compliment to his
grandfather. [12] no change, however, took place in the mind of the
unfortunate mother, who from this time was wholly occupied with the
project of returning to flanders. an invitation to that effect, which she
received from her husband in the month of november, determined her to
undertake the journey, at all hazards, notwithstanding the affectionate
remonstrances of the queen, who represented the impracticability of
traversing france, agitated, as it then was, with all the bustle of
war-like preparation, or of venturing by sea at this inclement and
stormy season.

one evening, while her mother was absent at segovia, joanna, whose
residence was at medina del campo, left her apartment in the castle, and
sallied out, though in dishabille, without announcing her purpose to any
of her attendants. they followed, however, and used every argument and
entreaty to prevail on her to return, at least for the night, but without
effect; until the bishop of burgos, who had charge of her household,
finding every other means ineffectual, was compelled to close the castle
gates, in order to prevent her departure.

the princess, thus thwarted in her purpose, gave way to the most violent
indignation. she menaced the attendants with her utmost vengeance for
their disobedience, and, taking her station on the barrier, she
obstinately refused to re-enter the castle, or even to put on any
additional clothing, but remained cold and shivering on the spot till the
following morning. the good bishop, sorely embarrassed by the dilemma to
which he found himself reduced, of offending the queen by complying with
the mad humor of the princess, or the latter still more, by resisting it,
despatched an express in all haste to isabella, acquainting her with the
affair, and begging instructions how to proceed.

the queen, who was staying, as has been said, at segovia, about forty
miles distant, alarmed at the intelligence, sent the king's cousin, the
admiral henriquez, together with the archbishop of toledo, at once to
medina, and prepared to follow as fast as the feeble state of her health
would permit. the efforts of these eminent persons, however, were not much
more successful than those of the bishop. all they could obtain from
joanna was, that she would retire to a miserable kitchen in the
neighborhood, during the night; while she persisted in taking her station
on the barrier as soon as it was light, and continued there, immovable as
a statue, the whole day. in this deplorable state she was found by the
queen on her arrival; and it was not without great difficulty that the
latter, with all the deference habitually paid her by her daughter,
succeeded in persuading her to return to her own apartments in the castle.
these were the first unequivocal symptoms of that hereditary taint of
insanity which had clouded the latter days of isabella's mother, and
which, with a few brief intervals, was to shed a deeper gloom over the
long-protracted existence of her unfortunate daughter. [13]

the conviction of this sad infirmity of the princess gave a shock to the
unhappy mother, scarcely less than that which she had formerly been called
to endure in the death of her children. the sorrows, over which time had
had so little power, were opened afresh by a calamity, which naturally
filled her with the most gloomy forebodings for the fate of her people,
whose welfare was to be committed to such incompetent hands. these
domestic griefs were still further swelled at this time by the death of
two of her ancient friends and counsellors, juan chacon, adelantado of
murcia, [14] and gutierre de cardenas, grand commander of leon. [15] they
had attached themselves to isabella in the early part of her life, when
her fortunes were still under a cloud; and they afterwards reaped the
requital of their services in such ample honors and emoluments as royal
gratitude could bestow, and in the full enjoyment of her confidence, to
which their steady devotion to her interests well entitled them. [16]

but neither the domestic troubles which pressed so heavily on isabella's
heart, nor the rapidly declining state of her own health, had power to
blunt the energies of her mind, or lessen the vigilance with which she
watched over the interests of her people. a remarkable proof of this was
given in the autumn of the present year, 1503, when the country was
menaced with an invasion from france.

the whole french nation had shared the indignation of louis the twelfth,
at the mortifying result of his enterprise against naples; and it answered
his call for supplies so promptly and liberally, that, in a few months
after the defeat of cerignola, he was able to resume operations, on a more
formidable scale than france had witnessed for centuries. three large
armies were raised, one to retrieve affairs in italy, a second to
penetrate into spain, by the way of fontarabia, and a third to cross into
roussillon, and get possession of the strong post of salsas, the key of
the mountain passes in that quarter. two fleets were also equipped in the
ports of genoa and marseilles, the latter of which was to support the
invasion of roussillon by a descent on the coast of catalonia. these
various corps were intended to act in concert, and thus, by one grand,
simultaneous movement, spain was to be assailed on three several points of
her territory. the results did not correspond with the magnificence of the
apparatus. [17]

the army destined to march on fontarabia was placed under the command of
alan d'albret, father of the king of navarre, along the frontiers of whose
dominions its route necessarily lay. ferdinand had assured himself of the
favorable dispositions of this prince, the situation of whose kingdom,
more than its strength, made his friendship important; and the lord
d'albret, whether from a direct understanding with the spanish monarch, or
fearful of the consequences which might result to his son from the
hostility of the latter, detained the forces intrusted to him, so long
among the bleak and barren fastnesses of the mountains, that at length,
exhausted by fatigue and want of food, the army melted away without even
reaching the enemy's borders. [18]

the force directed against roussillon was of a more formidable character.
it was commanded by the marechal de rieux, a brave and experienced
officer, though much broken by age and bodily infirmities. it amounted to
more than twenty thousand men. its strength, however, lay chiefly in its
numbers. it was, with the exception of a few thousand lansquenets under
william de la marck, [19] made up of the arriere-ban of the kingdom, and
the undisciplined militia from the great towns of languedoc. with this
numerous array the french marshal entered roussillon without opposition,
and sat down before salsas on the 16th of september, 1503.

the old castle of salsas, which had been carried without much difficulty
by the french in the preceding war, had been put in a defensible condition
at the commencement of the present, under the superintendence of pedro
navarro, although the repairs were not yet wholly completed. ferdinand, on
the approach of the enemy, had thrown a thousand picked men into the
place, which was well victualled and provided for a siege; while a corps
of six thousand was placed under his cousin, don frederic de toledo, duke
of alva, with orders to take up a position in the neighborhood, where he
might watch the movements of the enemy, and annoy him as far as possible
by cutting off his supplies. [20]

ferdinand, in the mean while, lost no time in enforcing levies throughout
the kingdom, with which he might advance to the relief of the beleaguered
fortress. while thus occupied, he received such accounts of the queen's
indisposition as induced him to quit aragon, where he then was, and hasten
by rapid journeys to castile. the accounts were probably exaggerated; he
found no cause for immediate alarm on his arrival, and isabella, ever
ready to sacrifice her own inclinations to the public weal, persuaded him
to return to the scene of operations, where his presence at this juncture
was so important. forgetting her illness, she made the most unwearied
efforts for assembling troops without delay to support her husband. the
grand constable of castile was commissioned to raise levies through every
part of the kingdom, and the principal nobility flocked in with their
retainers from the farthest provinces, all eager to obey the call of their
beloved mistress. thus strengthened, ferdinand, whose head-quarters were
established at girona, saw himself in less than a month in possession of a
force, which, including the supplies of aragon, amounted to ten or twelve
thousand horse, and three or four times that number of foot. he no longer
delayed his march, and about the middle of october put his army in motion,
proposing to effect a junction with the duke of alva, then lying before
perpignan, at a few leagues' distance from salsas. [21] isabella, who was
at segovia, was made acquainted by regular expresses with every movement
of the army. she no sooner learned its departure from gerona than she was
filled with disquietude at the prospect of a speedy encounter with the
enemy, whose defeat, whatever glory it might reflect on her own arms,
could be purchased only at the expense of christian blood. she wrote in
earnest terms to her husband, requesting him not to drive his enemies to
despair by closing up their retreat to their own land, but to leave
vengeance to him to whom alone it belonged. she passed her days, together
with her whole household, in fasting and continual prayer, and, in the
fervor of her pious zeal, personally visited the several religious houses
of the city, distributing alms among their holy inmates, and imploring
them humbly to supplicate the almighty to avert the impending calamity.
[22]

the prayers of the devout queen and her court found favor with heaven.
[23] king ferdinand reached perpignan on the 19th of october, and on that
same night the french marshal, finding himself unequal to the rencontre
with the combined forces of spain, broke up his camp, and, setting fire to
his tents, began his retreat towards the frontier, having consumed nearly
six weeks since first opening trenches. ferdinand pressed close on his
flying enemy, whose rear sustained some annoyance from the spanish
_ginetes_, in its passage through the defiles of the sierras. the retreat,
however, was conducted in too good order to allow any material loss to be
inflicted on the french, who succeeded at length in sheltering themselves
under the cannon of narbonne, up to which place they were pursued by their
victorious foe. several places on the frontier, as leocate, palme, sigean,
roquefort, and others, were abandoned to the spaniards, who pillaged them
of whatever was worth carrying off; without any violence, however, to the
persons of the inhabitants, whom, as a christian population, if we are to
believe martyr, ferdinand refused even to make prisoners. [24]

the spanish monarch made no attempt to retain these acquisitions; but,
having dismantled some of the towns, which offered most resistance,
returned loaded with the spoils of victory to his own dominions. "had he
been as good a general as he was a statesman," says a spanish historian,
"he might have penetrated to the centre of france." [25] ferdinand,
however, was too prudent to attempt conquests which could only be
maintained, if maintained at all, at an infinite expense of blood and
treasure. he had sufficiently vindicated his honor by meeting his foe so
promptly, and driving him triumphantly over the border; and he preferred,
like a cautious prince, not to risk all he had gained by attempting more,
but to employ his present successes as a vantage-ground for entering on
negotiation, in which at all times he placed more reliance than on the
sword.

in this, his good star still further favored him. the armada, equipped at
so much cost by the french king at marseilles, had no sooner put to sea,
than it was assailed by furious tempests, and so far crippled, that it was
obliged to return to port without even effecting a descent on the spanish
coast.

these accumulated disasters so disheartened louis the twelfth, that he
consented to enter into negotiations for a suspension of hostilities; and
an armistice was finally arranged, through the mediation of his pensioner
frederic, ex-king of naples, between the hostile monarchs. it extended
only to their hereditary dominions; italy and the circumjacent seas being
still left open as a common arena, on which the rival parties might meet,
and settle their respective titles by the sword. this truce, first
concluded for five months, was subsequently prolonged to three years. it
gave ferdinand, what he most needed, leisure, and means to provide for the
security of his italian possessions, on which the dark storm of war was
soon to burst with ten-fold fury. [26]

the unfortunate frederic, who had been drawn from his obscurity to take
part in these negotiations, died in the following year. it is singular
that the last act of his political life should have been to mediate a
peace between the dominions of two monarchs, who had united to strip him
of his own.

the results of this campaign were as honorable to spain, as they were
disastrous and humiliating to louis the twelfth, who had seen his arms
baffled on every point, and all his mighty apparatus of fleets and armies
dissolve, as if by enchantment, in less time than it had been preparing.
the immediate success of spain may no doubt be ascribed in a considerable
degree to the improved organization and thorough discipline introduced by
the sovereigns into the national militia at the close of the moorish war,
without which it would have been scarcely possible to concentrate so
promptly on a distant point such large masses of men, all well equipped
and trained for active service. so soon was the nation called to feel the
effect of these wise provisions.

but the results of the campaign are, after all, less worthy of notice as
indicating the resources of the country, than as evidence of a pervading
patriotic feeling, which could alone make these resources available.
instead of the narrow local jealousies, which had so long estranged the
people of the separate provinces, and more especially those of the rival
states of aragon and castile, from one another, there had been gradually
raised up a common national sentiment like that knitting together the
constituent parts of one great commonwealth. at the first alarm of
invasion on the frontier of aragon, the whole extent of the sister
kingdom, from the green, valleys of the guadalquivir up to the rocky
fastnesses of the asturias, responded to the call, as to that of a common
country, sending forth, as we have seen, its swarms of warriors, to repel
the foe, and roll back the tide of war upon his own land. what a contrast
did all this present to the cold and parsimonious hand with which the
nation, thirty years before, dealt out its supplies to king john the
second, ferdinand's father, when he was left to cope single-handed with
the whole power of france, in this very quarter of roussillon. such was
the consequence of the glorious _union_, which brought together the
petty and hitherto discordant tribes of the peninsula under the same rule;
and, by creating common interests and an harmonious principle of action,
was silently preparing them for constituting one great nation,--one and
indivisible, as intended by nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

those who have not themselves had occasion to pursue historical inquiries
will scarcely imagine on what loose grounds the greater part of the
narrative is to be built. with the exception of a few leading outlines,
there is such a mass of inconsistency and contradiction in the details,
even of contemporaries, that it seems almost as hopeless to seize the true
aspect of any particular age as it would be to transfer to the canvas a
faithful likeness of an individual from a description simply of his
prominent features.

much of the difficulty might seem to be removed, now that we are on the
luminous and beaten track of italian history; but, in fact, the vision is
rather dazzled than assisted by the numerous cross lights thrown over the
path, and the infinitely various points of view from which every object is
contemplated. besides the local and party prejudices which we had to
encounter in the contemporary spanish historians, we have now a host of
national prejudices, not less unfavorable to truth; while the remoteness
of the scene of action necessarily begets a thousand additional
inaccuracies in the gossipping and credulous chroniclers of france and
spain.

the mode in which public negotiations were conducted at this period,
interposes still further embarrassments in our search after truth. they
were regarded as the personal concerns of the sovereign, in which the
nation at large had no right to interfere. they were settled, like the
rest of his private affairs, under his own eye, without the participation
of any other branch of the government. they were shrouded, therefore,
under an impenetrable secrecy, which permitted such results only to emerge
into light as suited the monarch. even these results cannot be relied on
as furnishing the true key to the intentions of the parties. the science
of the cabinet, as then practised, authorized such a system of artifice
and shameless duplicity, as greatly impaired the credit of those official
documents which we are accustomed to regard as the surest foundations of
history.

the only records which we can receive with full confidence are the private
correspondence of contemporaries, which, from its very nature, is exempt
from most of the restraints and affectations incident more or less to
every work destined for the public eye. such communications, indeed, come
like the voice of departed years; and when, as in martyr's case, they
proceed from one whose acuteness is combined with singular opportunities
for observation, they are of inestimable value. instead of exposing to us
only the results, they lay open the interior workings of the machinery,
and we enter into all the shifting doubts, passions, and purposes which
agitate the minds of the actors. unfortunately, the chain of
correspondence here, as in similar cases, when not originally designed for
historical uses, necessarily suffers from occasional breaks and
interruptions. the scattered gleams which are thrown over the most
prominent points, however, shed so strong a light, as materially to aid us
in groping our way through the darker and more perplexed passages of the
story.

the obscurity which hangs over the period has not been dispelled by those
modern writers, who, like varillas, in his well-known work, _politique
de ferdinand le catholique_, affect to treat the subject philosophically,
paying less attention to facts than to their causes and consequences.
these ingenious persons, seldom willing to take things as they find them,
seem to think that truth is only to be reached by delving deep below the
surface. in this search after more profound causes of action, they reject
whatever is natural and obvious. they are inexhaustible in conjectures and
fine-spun conclusions, inferring quite as much from what is not said or
done, as from what is. in short, they put the reader as completely in
possession of their hero's thoughts on all occasions, as any professed
romance-writer would venture to do. all this may be very agreeable, and,
to persons of easy faith, very satisfactory; but it is not history and may
well remind us of the astonishment somewhere expressed by cardinal de retz
at the assurance of those who, at a distance from the scene of action,
pretended to lay open all the secret springs of policy, of which he
himself, though a principal party, was ignorant.

no prince, on the whole, has suffered more from these unwarrantable
liberties than ferdinand the catholic. his reputation for shrewd policy
suggests a ready key to whatever is mysterious and otherwise inexplicable
in his government; while it puts writers like gaillard and varillas
constantly on the scent after the most secret and subtile sources of
action, as if there were always something more to be detected than readily
meets the eye. instead of judging him by the general rules of human
conduct, everything is referred to deep-laid stratagem; no allowance is
made for the ordinary disturbing forces, the passions and casualties of
life; every action proceeds with the same wary calculation that regulates
the moves upon a chessboard; and thus a character of consummate artifice
is built up, not only unsupported by historical evidence, but in manifest
contradiction to the principles of our nature. the part of our subject
embraced in the present chapter has long been debatable ground between the
french and spanish historians; and the obscurity which hangs over it has
furnished an ample range for speculation to the class of writers above
alluded to, which they have not failed to improve.


footnotes

[1] st. gelais seems willing to accept philip's statement, and to consider
the whole affair of the negotiation as "one of ferdinand's old tricks,"
"l'ancienne cantele de celuy qui en scavoit bien faire d'autres." hist. de
louys xii., p. 172.

[2] idem, ubi supra.--garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. p. 410.--gaillard,
rivalite, tom. iv. pp. 238, 239.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap.
23.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 15.--ferreras, hist.
d'espagne, tom. viii. p. 233.

[3] garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. p. 388.--abarca, reyes de aragon,
tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 3.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. p. 300,
ed. 1645.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 9.

it is amusing to see with what industry certain french writers, as
gaillard and varillas, are perpetually contrasting the _bonne foi_ of
louis xii. with the _mechancete_ of ferdinand, whose secret intentions,
even, are quoted in evidence of his hypocrisy, while the most
objectionable acts of his rival seem to be abundantly compensated by some
fine sentiment like that in the text.

[4] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 10.--abarca,
reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 2.--mariana, hist. de
espana, tom. ii. pp. 690, 691.--et al.

[5] seyssel, hist. de louys xii., p. 61.--st. gelais, hist. de louys xii.,
p. 171.--gaillard, rivalite, tom. iv. p. 239.--garnier, hist. de france,
tom. v. p. 387.--d'auton, hist. de louys xii., part. 2, chap. 32.

[6] varillas regards philip's mission to france as a _coup de maitre_
on the part of ferdinand, who thereby rid himself of a dangerous rival at
home, likely to contest his succession to castile on isabella's death,
while he employed that rival in outwitting louis xii. by a treaty which he
meant to disavow. (politique de ferdinand, liv. 1, pp. 146-150.) the first
of these imputations is sufficiently disproved by the fact that philip
quitted spain in opposition to the pressing remonstrances of the king,
queen, and cortes, and to the general disgust of the whole nation, as is
repeatedly stated by gomez, martyr, and other contemporaries. the second
will be difficult to refute, and still harder to prove, as it rests on a
man's secret intentions, known only to himself. such are the flimsy
cobwebs of which this political dreamer's theories are made. truly
_chateaux en espagne_.

[7] martyr, whose copious correspondence furnishes the most valuable
commentary, unquestionably, on the proceedings of this reign, is
provokingly reserved in regard to this interesting matter. he contents
himself with remarking in one of his letters, that "the spaniards derided
philip's negotiations as of no consequence, and indeed altogether
preposterous, considering the attitude assumed by the nation at that very
time for maintaining its claims by the sword;" and he dismisses the
subject with a reflection, that seems to rest the merits of the case more
on might than right. "exitus, qui judex est rerum aeternus, loquatur.
nostri regno potiuntur majori ex parte." (opus epist., epist. 257.) this
reserve of martyr might be construed unfavorably for ferdinand, were it
not for the freedom with which he usually criticizes whatever appears
really objectionable to him in the measures of the government.

[8] grotius, de jure belli et pacis, lib. 2, cap. 11, sec. 12; lib. 3,
cap. 22, sec. 4.--gentilis, de jure belli, lib. 3, cap. 14, apud
bynkershoek, quaest. juris publici, lib. 2, cap. 7.

[9] bynkershoek, quaest. juris publici, lib. 2, cap. 7.--mably, droit
publique, chap. 1.--vattel, droit des gens, liv. 2, chap. 12.--martens,
law of nations, trans., book 2, chap. 1.

bynkershoek, the earliest of these writers, has discussed the question
with an amplitude, perspicuity, and fairness unsurpassed by any who have
followed him.

[10] philip is known in history by the title of "the handsome," implying
that he was, at least, quite as remarkable for his personal qualities, as
his mental.

[11] opus epist., epist. 253.--ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom. viii. pp.
235, 238.--gomez, de rebus gestis, fol. 44.

[12] carbajal, anales, ms., ano 1503.--gomez, de rebus gestis, fol. 45,
46.

he was born at alcala de henares. ximenes availed himself of this
circumstance to obtain from isabella a permanent exemption from taxes for
his favorite city, which his princely patronage was fast raising up to
contest the palm of literary precedence with salamanca, the ancient
"athens of spain." the citizens of the place long preserved, and still
preserve, for aught i know, the cradle of the royal infant, in token of
their gratitude. robles, vida de ximenez, p. 127.

[13] peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 268.--zurita, hist. del rey
hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 56.--gomez, de rebus gestis, fol. 46.

[14] "espejo de bondad," _mirror of virtue,_ as oviedo styles this
cavalier. he was always much regarded by the sovereigns, and the lucrative
post of _contador mayor_, which he filled for many years, enabled him
to acquire an immense estate, 50,000 ducats a year, without imputation on
his honesty. quincuagenas, ms., bat. 1, quinc. 2, dial. 2.

[15] the name of this cavalier, as well as that of his cousin, alonso de
cardenas, grand master of st. james, have become familiar to us in the
granadine war. if don gutierre made a less brilliant figure than the
latter, he acquired, by means of his intimacy with the sovereigns, and his
personal qualities, as great weight in the royal councils as any subject
in the kingdom. "nothing of any importance," says oviedo, "was done
without his advice." he was raised to the important posts of comendador de
leon, and contador mayor, which last, in the words of the same author,
"made its possessor a second king over the public treasury." he left large
estates, and more than five thousand vassals. his eldest son was created
duke of maqueda. quincuagenas, ms., bat. 1, quinc. 2, dial. 1.--col. de
ced., tom. v. no. 182.

[16] peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 255.--gomez, de rebus gestis, fol.
45.--for some further account of these individuals see part i, chapter 14,
note 10.

martyr thus panegyrizes the queen's fortitude under her accumulated
sorrows. "sentit, licet constantissima sit, et supra foeminam prudens, has
alapas fortunae saevientis regina, ita concussa fluctibus undique, veluti
vasta rupes, maris in medio." opus epist., loc. cit.

[17] garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp. 405, 406.--ferreras, hist.
d'espagne, tom. viii. pp. 235-238.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. pp.
300, 301.--memoires de la tremoille, chap. 19, apud petitot, collection
des memoires, tom. xiv.

[18] aleson, annales de navarra, tom. v. pp. 110-112.

the king of navarre promised to oppose the passage of the french, if
attempted, through his dominions; and, in order to obviate any distrust on
the part of ferdinand, sent his daughter margaret to reside at the court
of castile, as a pledge for his fidelity. ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom.
viii. p. 235.

[19] younger brother of robert, third duke of bouillon. (d'auton, hist. de
louys xii., part. 2, pp. 103, 186.) the reader will not confound him with
his namesake, the famous "boar of ardennes,"--more familiar to us now in
the pages of romance than history,--who perished ignominiously some twenty
years before this period, in 1484, not in fight, but by the hands of the
common executioner at utrecht. duclos, hist. de louis xi., tom. ii. p.
379.

[20] gonzalo ayora, capitan de la guardia real, cartas al rey, don
fernando, (madrid, 1794,) carta 9.--aleson, annales de navarra, tom. v.
pp. 112, 113.--garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. p. 407.--zurita, anales,
tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 51.--abarca, reyes de aragon, tom, ii, rey 30, cap.
13, sec. 11.

[21] gonzalo ayora, cartas, cap. 9.--zurita, anales, ubi supra.--
bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 197, 198.--carbajal, anales, ms.,
ano 1503.--sandoval, hist. del emp. carlos v., tom. i. p. 8.--col. de
cedulas, tom. i. no. 97.

the most authentic account of the siege of salsas is to be found in the
correspondence of gonzalo ayora, dated in the spanish camp. this
individual, equally eminent in letters and arms, filled the dissimilar
posts of captain of the royal guard and historiographer of the crown. he
served in the army at this time, and was present at all its operations.
pref. ad cartas, de ayora; and nic. antonio, biliotheca nova, tom. i. p.
551.

[22] peter martyr, opus epist, epist. 263.

the loyal captain, ayora, shows little of this christian vein. he
concludes one of his letters with praying, no doubt most sincerely, "that
the almighty would be pleased to infuse less benevolence into the hearts
of the sovereigns, and incite them to chastise and humble the proud
french, and strip them of their ill-gotten possessions, which, however
repugnant to their own godly inclinations, would tend greatly to replenish
their coffers, as well as those of their, faithful and loving subjects."
see this graceless petition in his cartas, carta 9, p. 66.

[23] "exaudivit igitur sancte reginee religiosorumque ac virginum preces
summus altitonans." (peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 263.) the learned
theban borrows an epithet more familiar to greek and roman than to
christian ears.

[24] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 54.--abarca,
reyes de aragon, tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 11.-peter martyr, opus
epist., epist. 264.--carbajal, anales, ms., ano 1503.--bernaldez, reyes
catolicos, ms., cap. 198.--garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp. 408,
409.--gonzalo ayora, cartas, carta 11.--oviedo, quincuagenas, ms., dial.
de deza.

peter martyr seems to have shared none of isabella's scruples in regard to
bringing the enemy to battle. on the contrary, he indulges in a most
querulous strain of sarcasm against the catholic king for his remissness
in this particular. "quar elucescente die moniti nostri de gallorum
discessu ad eos, at sero, concurrerunt. rex perpiniani agebat, ad millia
passuum sex non brevia, uti nosti. propterea sero id actum, venit
concitato cursu, at sero. ad hostes itur, at sero. cernunt hostium acies,
at sero, at a longe. distabant jam milliaria circiter duo. ergo sero
phryges sapuerunt. cujus haec culpa, tu scrutator aliunde; mea est, si
nescis. maximam dedit ea dies, quae est, si nescis, calendarum novembrium
sexta, hispanis ignominiam, et aliquando jacturam illis pariet
collachrymandam." letter to the cardinal of santa cruz, epist. 262.

[25] aleson, annales de navarra, tom. v. p. 113.

oviedo, who was present in this campaign, seems to have been of the same
opinion. at least he says, "if the king had pursued vigorously, not a
frenchman would have lived to carry back the tidings of defeat to his own
land." if we are to believe him, ferdinand desisted from the pursuit at
the earnest entreaty of bishop deza, his confessor. quincuagenas, ms.

[26] zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 55.--abarca, reyes de aragon,
tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 13, sec. 11.--peter martyr, opus epist., epist.
264.--lanuza, historias, tom. i. cap. 17.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii.
lib. 19, cap. 16.--machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let. 27.

mons. varillas notices as the weak side of louis xii., "une demangeaison
de faire la paix a contre temps, dont il fut travaille durant toute sa
vie." (politique de ferdinand, liv. 1, p. 148.) a statesman shrewder than
varillas, de retz, furnishes, perhaps, the best key to this policy, in the
remark, "les gens foibles ne plient jamais quand ils le doivent."




chapter xiv.

italian wars.--condition of italy.--french and spanish armies on the
garigliano.

1503.

melancholy state of italy.--great preparations of louis.--gonsalvo
repulsed before gaeta.--armies on the garigliano.--bloody passage of the
bridge.--anxious expectation of italy.--critical situation of the
spaniards.--gonsalvo's resolution.--heroism of paredes and bayard.


we must now turn our eyes towards italy, where the sounds of war, which
had lately died away, were again heard in wilder dissonance than ever. our
attention, hitherto, has been too exclusively directed to mere military
manoeuvres to allow us to dwell much on the condition of this unhappy
land. the dreary progress of our story, over fields of blood and battle,
might naturally dispose the imagination to lay the scene of action in some
rude and savage age; an age, at best, of feudal heroism, when the energies
of the soul could be roused only by the fierce din of war.

far otherwise, however; the tents of the hostile armies were now pitched
in the bosom of the most lovely and cultivated regions on the globe;
inhabited by a people who had carried the various arts of policy and
social life to a degree of excellence elsewhere unknown; whose natural
resources had been augmented by all the appliances of ingenuity and
industry; whose cities were crowded with magnificent and costly works of
public utility; into whose ports every wind that blew wafted the rich
freights of distant climes; whose thousand hills were covered to their
very tops with the golden labors of the husbandman; and whose intellectual
development showed itself, not only in a liberal scholarship far
outstripping that of their contemporaries, but in works of imagination,
and of elegant art more particularly, which rivalled the best days of
antiquity. the period before us, indeed, the commencement of the sixteenth
century, was that of their meridian splendor, when italian genius,
breaking through the cloud which had temporarily obscured its early dawn,
shone out in full effulgence; for we are now touching on the age of
machiavelli, ariosto, and michael angelo,--the golden age of leo the
tenth.

it is impossible, even at this distance of time, to contemplate without
feelings of sadness the fate of such a country, thus suddenly converted
into an arena for the bloody exhibitions of the gladiators of europe; to
behold her trodden under foot by the very nations on whom she had freely
poured the light of civilization; to see the fierce soldiery of europe,
from the danube to the tagus, sweeping like an army of locusts over her
fields, defiling her pleasant places, and raising the shout of battle, or
of brutal triumph under the shadow of those monuments of genius, which
have been the delight and despair of succeeding ages. it was the old story
of the goths and vandals acted over again. those more refined arts of the
cabinet, on which the italians were accustomed to rely, much more than on
the sword, in their disputes with one another, were of no avail against
these rude invaders, whose strong arm easily broke through the subtile
webs of policy which entangled the movements of less formidable
adversaries. it was the triumph of brute force over civilization,--one of
the most humiliating lessons by which providence has seen fit to rebuke
the pride of human intellect. [1]

the fate of italy inculcates a most important lesson. with all this
outward show of prosperity, her political institutions had gradually lost
the vital principle, which could alone give them stability or real value.
the forms of freedom, indeed, in most instances, had sunk under the
usurpation of some aspiring chief. everywhere patriotism was lost in the
most intense selfishness. moral principle was at as low an ebb in private,
as in public life. the hands, which shed their liberal patronage over
genius and learning, were too often red with blood. the courtly precincts,
which seemed the favorite haunt of the muses, were too often the epicurean
sty of brutish sensuality; while the head of the church itself, whose
station, exalted over that of every worldly potentate, should have raised
him at least above their grosser vices, was sunk in the foulest
corruptions that debase poor human nature. was it surprising, then, that
the tree, thus cankered at heart, with all the goodly show of blossoms on
its branches, should have fallen before the blast, which now descended in
such pitiless fury from the mountains?

had there been an invigorating national feeling, any common principle of
coalition among the italian states; had they, in short, been true to
themselves, they possessed abundant resources in their wealth, talent, and
superior science, to have shielded their soil from violation.
unfortunately, while the other european states had been augmenting their
strength incalculably by the consolidation of their scattered fragments
into one whole, those of italy, in the absence of some great central point
round which to rally, had grown more and more confirmed in their original
disunion. thus, without concert in action, and destitute of the vivifying
impulse of patriotic sentiment, they were delivered up to be the spoil and
mockery of nations, whom in their proud language they still despised as
barbarians; an impressive example of the impotence of human genius, and of
the instability of human institutions, however excellent in themselves,
when unsustained by public and private virtue. [2]

the great powers, who had now entered the lists, created entirely new
interests in italy, which broke up the old political combinations. the
conquest of milan enabled france to assume a decided control over the
affairs of the country. her recent reverses in naples, however, had
greatly loosened this authority; although florence and other neighboring
states, which lay under her colossal shadow, still remained true to her.
venice, with her usual crafty policy, kept aloof, maintaining a position
of neutrality between the belligerents, each of whom made the most
pressing efforts to secure so formidable an 'ally. she had, however, long
since entertained a deep distrust of her french neighbor; and, although
she would enter into no public engagements, she gave the spanish minister
every assurance of her friendly disposition towards his government. [3]
she intimated this still more unequivocally, by the supplies she had
allowed her citizens to carry into barleta during the late campaign, and
by other indirect aid of a similar nature during the present; for all
which she was one day to be called to a heavy reckoning by her enemies.

the disposition of the papal court towards the french monarch was still
less favorable; and it took no pains to conceal this after his reverses in
naples. soon after the defeat of cerignola, it entered into correspondence
with gonsalvo de cordova; and, although alexander the sixth refused to
break openly with france, and sign a treaty with the spanish sovereigns,
he pledged himself to do so, on the reduction of gaeta. in the mean time,
he freely allowed the great captain to raise such levies as he could in
rome, before the very eyes of the french ambassador. so little had the
immense concessions of louis, including those of principle and honor,
availed to secure the fidelity of this treacherous ally. [4]

with the emperor maximilian, notwithstanding repeated treaties, he was on
scarcely better terms. that prince was connected with spain by the
matrimonial alliances of his family, and no less averse to france from
personal feeling, which, with the majority of minds, operates more
powerfully than motives of state policy. he had, moreover, always regarded
the occupation of milan by the latter as an infringement, in some measure,
of his imperial rights. the spanish government, availing itself of these
feelings, endeavored through its minister, don juan manuel, to stimulate
maximilian to the invasion of lombardy. as the emperor, however, demanded,
as usual, a liberal subsidy for carrying on the war, king ferdinand, who
was seldom incommoded by a superfluity of funds, preferred reserving them
for his own enterprises, to hazarding them on the quixotic schemes of his
ally. but, although the negotiations were attended with no result, the
amicable dispositions of the austrian government were evinced by the
permission given to its subjects to serve under the banners of gonsalvo,
where indeed, as we have already seen, they formed some of his best
troops. [5]

but while louis the twelfth drew so little assistance from abroad, the
heartiness with which the whole french people entered into his feelings at
this crisis, made him nearly independent of it, and, in an incredibly
short space of time, placed him in a condition for resuming operations on
a far more formidable scale than before. the preceding failures in italy
he attributed in a great degree to an overweening confidence in the
superiority of his own troops, and his neglect to support them with the
necessary reinforcements and supplies. he now provided against this by
remitting large sums to rome, and establishing ample magazines of grain
and military stores there, under the direction of commissaries for the
maintenance of the army. he equipped without loss of time a large armament
at genoa, under the marquis of saluzzo, for the relief of gaeta, still
blockaded by the spaniards. he obtained a small supply of men from his
italian allies, and subsidized a corps of eight thousand swiss, the
strength of his infantry; while the remainder of his army, comprehending a
fine body of cavalry, and the most complete train of artillery, probably,
in europe, was drawn from his own dominions. volunteers of the highest
rank pressed forward to serve in an expedition, to which they confidently
looked for the vindication of the national honor. the command was
intrusted to the marechal de la tremouille, esteemed the best general in
france; and the whole amount of force, exclusive of that employed
permanently in the fleet, is variously computed from twenty to thirty
thousand men. [6]

in the month of july, the army was on its march across the broad plains of
lombardy, but, on reaching parma, the appointed place of rendezvous for
the swiss and italian mercenaries, was brought to a halt by tidings of an
unlooked-for event, the death of pope alexander the sixth. he expired on
the 18th of august, 1503, at the age of seventy-two, the victim, there is
very little doubt, of poison he had prepared for others; thus closing an
infamous life by a death equally infamous. he was a man of undoubted
talent, and uncommon energy of character. but his powers were perverted to
the worst purposes, and his gross vices were unredeemed, if we are to
credit the report of his most respectable contemporaries, by a single
virtue. in him the papacy reached its lowest degradation. his pontificate,
however, was not without its use; since that providence, which still
educes good from evil, made the scandal, which it occasioned to the
christian world, a principal spring of the glorious reformation. [7]

the death of this pontiff occasioned no particular disquietude at the
spanish court, where his immoral life had been viewed with undisguised
reprobation, and made the subject of more than one pressing remonstrance,
as we have already seen. his public course had been as little to its
satisfaction; since, although a spaniard by birth, being a native of
valencia, he had placed himself almost wholly at the disposal of louis the
twelfth, in return for the countenance afforded by that monarch to the
iniquitous schemes of his son, caesar borgia.

the pope's death was attended with important consequences on the movements
of the french. louis's favorite minister, cardinal d'amboise, had long
looked to this event as opening to him the succession to the tiara. he now
hastened to italy, therefore, with his master's approbation, proposing to
enforce his pretensions by the presence of the french army, placed, as it
would seem, with this view at his disposal.

the army, accordingly, was ordered to advance towards rome, and halt
within a few miles of its gates. the conclave of cardinals, then convened
to supply the vacancy in the pontificate, were filled with indignation at
this attempt to overawe their election; and the citizens beheld with
anxiety the encampment of this formidable force under their walls,
anticipating some counteracting movement on the part of the great captain,
which might involve their capital, already in a state of anarchy, in all
the horrors of war. gonsalvo, indeed, had sent forward a detachment of
between two and three thousand men, under mendoza and fabrizio colonna,
who posted themselves in the neighborhood of the city, where they could
observe the movements of the enemy. [8]

at length cardinal d'amboise, yielding to public feeling, and the
representations of pretended friends, consented to the removal of the
french forces from the neighborhood, and trusted for success to his
personal influence. he over-estimated its weight. it is foreign to our
purpose to detail the proceedings of the reverend body, thus convened to
supply the chair of st. peter. they are displayed at full length by the
italian writers, and must be allowed to form a most edifying chapter in
ecclesiastical history. [9] it is enough to state, that, on the departure
of the french, the suffrages of the conclave fell on an italian, who
assumed the name of pius the third, and who justified the policy of the
choice by dying in less time than his best friends had anticipated;--
within a month after his elevation. [10]

the new vacancy was at once supplied by the election of julius the second,
the belligerent pontiff who made his tiara a helmet, and his crosier a
sword. it is remarkable, that, while his fierce, inexorable temper left
him with scarcely a personal friend, he came to the throne by the united
suffrages of each of the rival factions of france, spain, and, above all,
venice, whose ruin in return he made the great business of his restless
pontificate. [11]

no sooner had the game, into which cardinal d'amboise had entered with
such prospects of success, been snatched from his grasp by the superior
address of his italian rivals, and the election of pius the third been
publicly announced, than the french army was permitted to resume its march
on naples, after the loss,--an irreparable loss,--of more than a month. a
still greater misfortune had befallen it, in the mean time, in the illness
of tremouille, its chief; which compelled him to resign the command into
the hands of the marquis of mantua, an italian nobleman, who held the
second station in the army. he was a man of some military experience,
having fought in the venetian service, and led the allied forces, with
doubtful credit indeed, against charles the eighth at the battle of
fornovo. his elevation was more acceptable to his own countrymen than to
the french; and in truth, however competent to ordinary exigencies, he was
altogether unequal to the present, in, which he was compelled to measure
his genius with that of the greatest captain of the age. [12]

the spanish commander, in the mean while, was detained before the strong
post of gaeta, into which ives d'allegre had thrown himself, as already
noticed, with the fugitives from the field of cerignola, where he had been
subsequently reinforced by four thousand additional troops under the
marquis of saluzzo. from these circumstances, as well as the great
strength of the place, gonsalvo experienced an opposition, to which, of
late, he had been wholly unaccustomed. his exposed situation in the
plains, under the guns of the city, occasioned the loss of many of his
best men, and, among others, that of his friend don hugo de cardona, one
of the late victors at seminara, who was shot down at his side, while
conversing with him. at length, after a desperate but ineffectual attempt
to extricate himself from his perilous position by forcing the neighboring
eminence of mount orlando, he was compelled to retire to a greater
distance, and draw off his army to the adjacent village of castellone,
which may call up more agreeable associations in the reader's mind, as the
site of the villa formiana of cicero. [13] at this place he was still
occupied with the blockade of gaeta, when he received intelligence that
the french had crossed the tiber, and were in full march against him. [14]

while gonsalvo lay before gaeta, he had been intent on collecting such
reinforcements as he could from every quarter. the neapolitan division
under navarro had already joined him, as well as the victorious legions of
andrada from calabria. his strength was further augmented by the arrival
of between two and three thousand troops, spanish, german, and italian,
which the castilian minister, francisco de roxas, had levied in rome; and
he was in daily hopes of a more important accession from the same quarter,
through the good offices of the venetian ambassador. lastly, he had
obtained some additional recruits, and a remittance of a considerable sum
of money, in a fleet of catalan ships lately arrived from spain. with all
this, however, a heavy amount of arrears remained due to his troops. in
point of numbers he was still far inferior to the enemy; no computation
swelling them higher than three thousand horse, two of them light cavalry,
and nine thousand foot. the strength of his army lay in his spanish
infantry, on whose thorough discipline, steady nerve, and strong
attachment to his person he felt he might confidently rely. in cavalry,
and still more in artillery, he was far below the french, which, together
with his great numerical inferiority, made it impossible for him to keep
the open country. his only resource was to get possession of some pass or
strong position, which lay in their route, where he might detain them,
till the arrival of further reinforcements should enable him to face them
on more equal terms. the deep stream of the garigliano presented such a
line of defence as he wanted. [15]

on the 6th of october, therefore, the great captain broke up his camp at
castellone, and, abandoning the whole region north of the garigliano to
the enemy, struck into the interior of the country, and took post at san
germano, a strong place on the other side of the river, covered by the two
fortresses of monte casino [16] and rocca secca. into this last he threw a
body of determined men under villalba, and waited calmly the approach of
the enemy.

it was not long before the columns of the latter were descried in full
march on ponte corvo, at a few miles' distance only on the opposite side
of the garigliano. after a brief halt there, they traversed the bridge
before that place and advanced confidently forward in the expectation of
encountering little resistance from a foe so much their inferior. in this
they were mistaken; the garrison of rocca secca, against which they
directed their arms, handled them so roughly, that, after in vain
endeavoring to carry the place in two desperate assaults, the marquis of
mantua resolved to abandon the attempt altogether, and, recrossing the
river, to seek a more practicable point for his purpose lower down. [17]

keeping along the right bank, therefore, to the southeast of the mountains
of fondi, he descended nearly to the mouth of the garigliano, the site, as
commonly supposed, of the ancient minturnae. [18] the place was covered by
a fortress called the tower of the garigliano, occupied by a small spanish
garrison, who made some resistance, but surrendered on being permitted to
march out with the honors of war. on rejoining their countrymen under
gonsalvo, the latter were so much incensed that the garrison should have
yielded on any terms, instead of dying on their posts, that, falling on
them with their pikes, they massacred them all to a man. gonsalvo did not
think proper to punish this outrage, which, however shocking to his own
feelings, indicated a desperate tone of resolution, which he felt he
should have occasion to tax to the utmost in the present exigency. [19]

the ground now occupied by the armies was low and swampy, a character
which it possessed in ancient times; the marshes on the southern side
being supposed to be the same in which marius concealed himself from his
enemies during his proscription. [20] its natural humidity was greatly
increased, at this time, by the excessive rains, which began earlier and
with much more violence than usual. the french position was neither so low
nor so wet as that of the spaniards. it had the advantage, moreover, of
being supported by a well-peopled and friendly country in the rear, where
lay the large towns of fondi, itri, and gaeta; while their fleet, under
the admiral prejan, which rode at anchor in the mouth of the garigliano,
might be of essential service in the passage of the river.

in order to effect this, the marquis of mantua prepared to throw a bridge
across, at a point not far from trajetto. he succeeded in it,
notwithstanding the swollen and troubled condition of the waters, [20] in
a few days, under cover of the artillery, which he had planted on the bank
of the river, and which from its greater elevation entirely commanded the
opposite shore.

the bridge was constructed of boats belonging to the fleet, strongly
secured together and covered with planks. the work being completed, on the
6th of november the army advanced upon the bridge, supported by such a
lively cannonade from the batteries along the shore, as made all
resistance on the part of the spaniards ineffectual. the impetuosity with
which the french rushed forward was such as to drive back the advanced
guard of their enemy, which, giving way in disorder, retreated on the main
body. before the confusion could extend further, gonsalvo, mounted _a la
gineta_, in the manner of the light cavalry, rode through the broken
ranks, and, rallying the fugitives, quickly brought them to order. navarro
and andrada, at the same time, led up the spanish infantry, and the whole
column charging furiously against the french, compelled them to falter and
at length to fall back on the bridge.

the struggle now became desperate, officers and soldiers, horse and foot,
mingling together, and fighting hand to hand, with all the ferocity
kindled by close personal combat. some were trodden under the feet of the
cavalry, many more were forced from the bridge, and the waters of the
garigliano were covered with men and horses, borne down by the current,
and struggling in vain to gain the shore. it was a contest of mere bodily
strength and courage, in which skill and superior tactics were of little
avail. among those who most distinguished themselves, the name of the
noble italian, fabrizio colonna, is particularly mentioned. an heroic
action is recorded also of a person of inferior rank, a spanish
_alferez_, or standard-bearer, named illescas. the right hand of this
man was shot away by a cannon-ball. as a comrade was raising up the fallen
colors, the gallant ensign resolutely grasped them, exclaiming that "he
had one hand still left." at the same time, muffling a scarf round the
bleeding stump, he took his place in the ranks as before. this brave deed
did not go unrewarded, and a liberal pension was settled on him, at
gonsalvo's instance.

during the heat of the _melee_, the guns on the french shore had been
entirely silent, since they could not be worked without doing as much
mischief to their own men as to the spaniards, with whom they were closely
mingled. but, as the french gradually recoiled before their impetuous
adversaries, fresh bodies of the latter rushing forward to support their
advance necessarily exposed a considerable length of column to the range
of the french guns, which opened a galling fire on the further extremity
of the bridge. the spaniards, notwithstanding "they threw themselves into
the face of the cannon," as the marquis of mantua exclaimed, "with as much
unconcern as if their bodies had been made of air instead of flesh and
blood," found themselves so much distressed by this terrible fire, that
they were compelled to fall back; and the van, thus left without support,
at length retreated in turn, abandoning the bridge to the enemy. [21]

this action was one of the severest which occurred in these wars. don hugo
de moncada, the veteran of many a fight by land and sea, told paolo giovio
that "he had never felt himself in such imminent peril in any of his
battles, as in this." [22] the french, notwithstanding they remained
masters of the contested bridge, had met with a resistance which greatly
discouraged them; and, instead of attempting to push their success
further, retired that same evening to their quarters on the other side of
the river. the tempestuous weather, which continued with unabated fury,
had now broken up the roads, and converted the soil into a morass, nearly
impracticable for the movements, of horse, and quite so for those of
artillery, on which the french chiefly relied; while it interposed
comparatively slight obstacles to the manoeuvres of infantry, which
constituted the strength of the spaniards. from a consideration of these
circumstances, the french commander resolved not to resume active
operations till a change of weather, by restoring the roads, should enable
him to do so with advantage. meanwhile he constructed a redoubt on the
spanish extremity of the bridge, and threw a body of troops into it, in
order to command the pass whenever he should be disposed to use it. [23]

while the hostile armies thus lay facing each other, the eyes of all italy
were turned to them, in anxious expectation of a battle which should
finally decide the fate of naples. expresses were daily despatched from
the french camp to rome, whence the ministers of the different european
powers transmitted the tidings to their respective governments.
machiavelli represented at that time the florentine republic at the papal
court, and his correspondence teems with as many floating rumors and
speculations as a modern gazette. there were many french residents in the
city, with whom the minister was personally acquainted. he frequently
notices their opinions on the progress of the war, which they regarded
with the most sanguine confidence, as sure to result in the triumph of
their own arms, when once fairly brought into collision with the enemy.
the calmer and more penetrating eye of the florentine discerns symptoms in
the condition of the two armies of quite a different tendency. [24]

it seemed now obvious, that victory must declare for that party which
could best endure the hardships and privations of its present situation.
the local position of the spaniards was far more unfavorable than that of
the enemy. the great captain, soon after the affair of the bridge, had
drawn off his forces to a rising ground about a mile from the river, which
was crowned by the little hamlet of cintura, and commanded the route to
naples. in front of his camp he sunk a deep trench, which, in the
saturated soil, speedily filled with water; and he garnished it at each
extremity with a strong redoubt. thus securely intrenched, he resolved
patiently to await the movements of the enemy.

the situation of the army, in the mean time, was indeed deplorable. those
who occupied the lower level were up to their knees in mud and water; for
the excessive rains, and the inundation of the garigliano, had converted
the whole country into a mere quagmire, or rather standing pool. the only
way in which the men could secure themselves was by covering the earth as
far as possible with boughs and bundles of twigs; and it was altogether
uncertain how long even this expedient would serve against the encroaching
element. those on the higher grounds were scarcely in better plight. the
driving storms of sleet and rain, which had continued for several weeks
without intermission, found their way into every crevice of the flimsy
tents and crazy hovels, thatched only with branches of trees, which
afforded a temporary shelter to the troops. in addition to these evils,
the soldiers were badly fed, from the difficulty of finding resources in
the waste and depopulated regions in which they were quartered, [25] and
badly paid, from the negligence, or perhaps poverty, of king ferdinand,
whose inadequate remittances to his general exposed him, among many other
embarrassments, to the imminent hazard of disaffection among the soldiery,
especially the foreign mercenaries, which nothing, indeed, but the most
delicate and judicious conduct on his part could have averted. [26]

in this difficult crisis, gonsalvo de cordova retained all his usual
equanimity, and even the cheerfulness, so indispensable in a leader who
would infuse heart into his followers. he entered freely into the
distresses and personal feelings of his men, and, instead of assuming any
exemption from fatigue or suffering on the score of his rank, took his
turn in the humblest tour of duty with the meanest of them, mounting guard
himself, it is said, on more than one occasion. above all, he displayed
that inflexible constancy, which enables the strong mind in the hour of
darkness and peril to buoy up the sinking spirits around it. a remarkable
instance of this fixedness of purpose occurred at this time.

the forlorn condition of the army, and the indefinite prospect of its
continuance, raised a natural apprehension in many of the officers, that,
if it did not provoke some open act of mutiny, would in all probability
break down the spirits and constitution of the soldiers. several of them,
therefore, among the rest mendoza and the two colonnas, waited on the
commander-in-chief, and, after stating their fears without reserve,
besought him to remove the camp to capua, where the troops might find
healthy and commodious quarters, at least until the severity of the season
was mitigated; before which, they insisted, there was no reason to
anticipate any movement on the part of the french. but gonsalvo felt too
deeply the importance of grappling with the enemy, before they should gain
the open country, to be willing to trust to any such precarious
contingency. besides, he distrusted the effect of such a retrograde
movement on the spirits of his own troops. he had decided on his course
after the most mature deliberation; and, having patiently heard his
officers to the end, replied in these few but memorable words; "it is
indispensable to the public service to maintain our present position; and
be assured, i would sooner march forward two steps, though it should bring
me to my grave, than fall back one, to gain a hundred years." the decided
tone of the reply relieved him from further importunity. [27]

there is no act of gonsalvo's life, which on the whole displays more
strikingly the strength of his character. when thus witnessing his
faithful followers drooping and dying around him, with the consciousness
that a word could relieve them from all their distresses, he yet refrained
from uttering it, in stern obedience to what he regarded as the call of
duty; and this too on his own responsibility, in opposition to the
remonstrances of those on whose judgment he most relied.

gonsalvo confided in the prudence, sobriety, and excellent constitution of
the spaniards, for resisting the bad effects of the climate. he relied too
on their tried discipline, and their devotion to himself, for carrying
them through any sacrifice he should demand of them. his experience at
barleta led him to anticipate results of a very opposite character with
the french troops. the event justified his conclusions in both respects.

the french, as already noticed, occupied higher and more healthy ground,
on the other side of the garigliano, than their rivals. they were
fortunate enough also to find more effectual protection from the weather
in the remains of a spacious amphitheatre, and some other edifices, which
still covered the site of minturnae. with all this, however, they suffered
more severely from the inclement season than their robust adversaries.
numbers daily sickened and died. they were much straitened, moreover, from
want of provisions, through the knavish peculations of the commissaries
who had charge of the magazines in rome. thus situated, the fiery spirits
of the french soldiery, eager for prompt and decisive action, and
impatient of delay, gradually sunk under the protracted miseries of a war,
where the elements were the principal enemy, and where they saw themselves
melting away like slaves in a prison-ship, without even the chance of
winning an honorable death on the field of battle. [28]

the discontent occasioned by these circumstances was further swelled by
the imperfect success, which had attended their efforts, when allowed to
measure weapons with the enemy.

at length the latent mass of disaffection found an object on which to vent
itself, in the person of their commander-in-chief, the marquis of mantua,
never popular with the french soldiers. they now loudly taxed him with
imbecility, accused him of a secret understanding with the enemy, and
loaded him with the opprobrious epithets with which trans-alpine insolence
was accustomed to stigmatize the italians. in all this, they were secretly
supported by ives d'allegre, sandricourt, and other french officers, who
had always regarded with dissatisfaction the elevation of the italian
general; till at length the latter, finding that he had influence with
neither officers nor soldiers, and unwilling to retain command where he
had lost authority, availed himself of a temporary illness, under which he
was laboring, to throw up his commission, and withdrew abruptly to his own
estates.

he was succeeded by the marquis of saluzzo, an italian, indeed, by birth,
being a native of piedmont, but who had long served under the french
banners, where he had been intrusted by louis the twelfth with very
important commands. he was not deficient in energy of character or
military science. but it required powers of a higher order than his to
bring the army under subordination, and renew its confidence under present
circumstances. the italians, disgusted with the treatment of their former
chief, deserted in great numbers. the great body of the french chivalry,
impatient of their present unhealthy position, dispersed among the
adjacent cities of fondi, itri, and gaeta, leaving the low country around
the tower of the garigliano to the care of the swiss and german infantry.
thus, while the whole spanish army lay within a mile of the river, under
the immediate eye of their commander, prepared for instant service, the
french were scattered over a country more than ten miles in extent, where,
without regard to military discipline, they sought to relieve the dreary
monotony of a camp, by all the relaxations which such comfortable quarters
could afford. [29]

it must not be supposed that the repose of the two armies was never broken
by the sounds of war. more than one rencontre, on the contrary, with
various fortune, took place, and more than one display of personal prowess
by the knights of the two nations, as formerly at the siege of barleta.
the spaniards made two unsuccessful efforts to burn the enemy's bridge;
but they succeeded, on the other hand, in carrying the strong fortress of
rocca guglielma, garrisoned by the french. among the feats of individual
heroism, the castilian writers expatiate most complacently on that of
their favorite cavalier, diego de paredes, who descended alone on the
bridge against a body of french knights, all armed in proof, with a
desperate hardihood worthy of don quixote; and would most probably have
shared the usual fate of that renowned personage on such occasions, had he
not been rescued by a sally of his own countrymen. the french find a
counterpart to this adventure in that of the preux chevalier bayard, who,
with his single arm, maintained the barriers of the bridge against two
hundred spaniards, for an hour or more. [30]

such feats, indeed, are more easily achieved with the pen than with the
sword. it would be injustice, however, to the honest chronicler of the day
to suppose that he did not himself fully

  "believe the magic wonders that he sung."

every heart confessed the influence of a romantic age,--the dying age,
indeed, of chivalry,--but when, with superior refinement, it had lost
nothing of the enthusiasm and exaltation of its prime. a shadowy twilight
of romance enveloped every object. every day gave birth to such
extravagances, not merely of sentiment, but of action, as made it
difficult to discern the precise boundaries of fact and fiction. the
chronicler might innocently encroach sometimes on the province of the
poet, and the poet occasionally draw the theme of his visions from the
pages of the chronicler. such, in fact, was the case; and the romantic
muse of italy, then coming forth in her glory, did little more than give a
brighter flush of color to the chimeras of real life. the characters of
living heroes, a bayard, a paredes, and a la palice, readily supplied her
with the elements of those ideal combinations, in which she has so
gracefully embodied the perfections of chivalry. [31]


footnotes

[1]
  "o pria si cara al ciel del mondo parte,
  che l'acqua cigne, e 'l sasso orrido serra;
  o lieta sopra ogn' altra e dolce terra,
  che 'l superbo appennin segna e diparte;
  che val omai se 'l buon popol di marte
  ti lascio del mar donna e de la terra?
  le genti a te gia serve, or ti fan guerra,
  e pongon man ne le tue treccie sparte.
  lasso ne manea de' tuoi figli ancora
  chi le piu strane a te chiamando insieme
  la spada sua nel tuo bel corpo adopre.
  or son queste simili a l' antich' opre?
  o pur cosi pietate e dio a' onora?
  ahi secol duro, ahi tralignato seme."
                        bembo, rime son. 108.

this exquisite little lyric, inferior to none other which had appeared on
the same subject since the "italia mia" of petrarch, was composed by bembo
at the period of which we are treating.

[2] the philosophic machiavelli discerned the true causes of the
calamities, in the corruptions of his country; which he has exposed, with
more than his usual boldness and bitterness of sarcasm, in the seventh
book of his "arte della guerra."

[3] lorenzo suarez de la vega filled the post of minister at the republic
during the whole of the war. his long continuance in the office at so
critical a period, under so vigilant a sovereign as ferdinand, is
sufficient warrant for his ability. peter martyr, while he admits his
talents, makes some objections to his appointment, on the ground of his
want of scholarship. "nec placet quod hunc elegeritis hac tempestate.
maluissem namque virum, qui latinum calleret, vel salterm intelligeret,
linguam; hic tantum suam patriam vernaculam novit; prudentem esse alias,
atque inter ignaros literarum satis esse gnarum, rex ipse mihi testatus
est. cupissem tamen ego, quae dixi." (see the letter to the catholic
queen, opus epist., epist. 246.) the objections have weight undoubtedly,
the latin being the common medium of diplomatic intercourse at that time.
martyr, who on his return through venice from his egyptian mission took
charge for the time of the interests of spain, might probably have been
prevailed on to assume the difficulties of a diplomatic station there
himself. see also part ii. chapter 11, note 7, of this history.

[4] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 38, 48.--bembo,
istoria viniziana, tom. iii. lib. 6.--daru, hist. de venise, tom. iii. p.
347.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 6, p. 311, ed. 1645.--
buonaccorsi, diario, pp. 77, 81.

[5] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 55.--coxe,
history of the house of austria, (london, 1807,) vol. i. chap. 23.

[6] buonaccorsi, diario, p. 78.--st. gelais, hist. de louys xii., pp. 173,
174.--varillas, hist. de louis xii., tom. i. pp. 386, 387.--memoires de la
tremoille, chap. 19, apud petitot, collection des memoires, tom. xiv.--
muratori, annali d'italia, tom. xiv. anno 1503.--carta de gonzalo, ms.

historians, as usual, differ widely in their estimates of the french
numbers. guicciardini, whose moderate computation of 20,000 men is usually
followed, does not take the trouble to reconcile his sum total with the
various estimates given by him in detail, which considerably exceed that
amount. istoria, pp. 308, 309, 312.

[7] buonaccorsi, diario, p. 81.--bembo, istoria viniziana, lib. 6.

the little ceremony with which alexander's remains were treated, while yet
scarcely cold, is the best commentary on the general detestation in which
he was held. "lorsque alexandre," says the pope's _maitre des ceremonies_,
"rendit le dernier soupir, il n'y avait dans sa chambre que l'eveque de
rieti, le dataire et quelques palefreniers. cette chambre fut aussitot
pillee. la face du cadavre devint noire; la langue s'enfla au point
qu'elle remplissait la bouche qui resta ouverte. la biere dans laquelle il
fallait mettre le corps se trouva trop petite; on l'y enfonca a coups de
poings. les restes du pape insultes par ses domestiques furent portes dans
l'eglise de st. pierre, sans etre accompagnes de pretres ni de torches, et
on les placa en dedans de la grille du choeur pour les derober aux
outrages de la populace." notice de burchard, apud brequigny, notices
et extraits des manuscrits de la bibliotheque du roi, (paris, 1787-1818,)
tom. i. p. 120.

[8] buonaccorsi, diario, p. 82.--machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let.
1, 3, et al.--bembo, istoria viniziana, tom. iii. lib. 6.--ammirato,
istorie fiorentine, tom. iii. lib. 28.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5,
cap. 47.

[9] guicciardini, in particular, has related them with a circumstantiality
which could scarcely have been exceeded by one of the conclave itself.
istoria, lib. 6, pp. 316-318.

[10] bembo, istoria viniziana, lib. 6.--ammirato, istorie fiorentine, tom.
iii. lib. 28.

the election of pius was extremely grateful to queen isabella, who caused
te deums and thanksgivings to be celebrated in the churches, for the
appointment of "so worthy a pastor over the christian fold." see peter
martyr, opus epist., epist. 265.

[11] machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let. 6.--bembo, istoria
viniziana, lib. 7.

[12] garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp. 435-438.--guicciardini,
istoria, lib. 6, p. 316.--buonaccorsi, diario, p. 83.--st. gelais, hist.
de louys xii., p. 173.

[13] cicero's country seat stood midway between gaeta and mola, the
ancient formiae, about two miles and a half from each. (cluverius, ital.
antiq., lib. 3, cap. 6.) the remains of his mansion and of his mausoleum
may still be discerned, on the borders of the old appian way, by the
classical and credulous tourist.

[14] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 258, 259.--chronica del gran
capitan, lib. 2, cap. 95.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 19.--peter
martyr, opus epist., epist. 261.

[15] zurita, hist. del rey hernando, tom. i. lib. 5, cap. 38, 43, 44, 48,
57.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 258, 259.--sismondi, hist. des
francais, tom. xv. p. 417.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap.
16.--ferreras, hist. d'espagne, tom. viii. pp. 252-257.--carta del gran
capitan, ms.

the castilian writers do not state the sum total of the spanish force,
which is to be inferred only from the scattered estimates, careless and
contradictory as usual, of the various detachments which joined it.

[16] the spaniards carried monte casino by storm, and with sacrilegious
violence plundered the benedictine monastery of all its costly plate. they
were compelled, however, to respect the bones of the martyrs, and other
saintly relics; a division of spoil probably not entirely satisfactory to
its reverend inmates. giovio, vita magni gonsalvi, fol. 262.

[17] chronica del gran capitan, lib. 2, cap. 102.--ulloa, vita di carlo
v., fol. 21.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 6, pp. 326, 327.--peter
martyr, opus epist., epist. 267.--bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap.
188.

[18] the remains of this city, which stood about four miles above the
mouth of the liris, are still to be seen on the right of the road. in
ancient days it was of sufficient magnitude to cover both sides of the
river. see strabo, geographia, lib. 5, p. 233, (paris, 1629, with
casaubon's notes,) p. 110.

[19] chronica del gran capitan, lib. 2, cap. 107.--giovio, vita magni
gonsalvi, fol. 263.

[20] the marshes of minturnae lay between the city and the mouth of the
liris. (cluverius, ital. antiq., lib. 3, cap. 10, sec. 9.) the spanish
army encamped, says guicciardini, "in a place called by livy, from its
vicinity to sessa, _aquae sinuessanae_, being perhaps the marshes in
which marius hid himself." (istoria, lib. 6.) the historian makes two
blunders in a breath. 1st. _aquae sinuessanae_, was a name derived not
from sessa, the ancient suessa aurunca, but from the adjacent sinuessa, a
town about ten miles southeast of minturnae. (comp. livy, lib. 22, cap.
14, and strabo, lib. 5, p. 233.) 2d. the name did not indicate marshes,
but natural hot springs, particularly noted for their salubrity.
"salubritate harum aquarum," says tacitus in allusion to them (annales,
lib. 12); and pliny notices their medicinal properties more explicitly.
hist. naturalis, lib. 31, cap. 2.

[20] this does not accord with horace's character of the garigliano, the
ancient liris, as the "taciturnus amnis," (carm., lib. i. 30,) and still
less with that of silius italicus,

  "liris ... qui fonte quieto
  dissimulat cursum, et _nullo mutabilis imbre_
  perstringit tacitas gemmanti gurgite ripas."
                             puncia, lib. 4.

indeed, the stream exhibits at the present day the same soft and tranquil
aspect celebrated by the roman poets. its natural character, however, was
entirely changed at the period before us, in consequence of the unexampled
heaviness and duration of the autumnal rains.

[21] bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 188.--abarca, reyes de aragon,
tom. ii. rey 30, cap. 14.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap. 16.
--peter martyr, opus epist., epist. 269.--giovio, vitae illust. virorum,
fol. 262-264.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 22.--machiavelli, legazione
prima a roma, let. 11, nov. 10.--let. 16, nov. 13.--let. 17.--chronica del
gran capitan, lib. 2, cap. 106.--garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp.
440, 441.

[22] giovio, vitae illust. virorum, fol. 264.

[23] guicciardini, istoria, lib. 6, pp. 327, 328.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, fol. 262.--machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let. 29.--
garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp. 443-445.

[24] legazione prima a roma, let. 9, 10, 18.

the french showed the same confidence from the beginning of hostilities.
one of that nation having told suarez, the castilian minister at venice,
that the marshal de la tremouille said, "he would give 20,000 ducats, if
he could meet gonsalvo de cordova in the plains of viterbo;" the spaniard
smartly replied, "nemours would have given twice as much not to have met
him at cerignola." zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 36.

[25] this barren tract of uninhabited country must have been of very
limited extent; for it lay in the campania felix, in the neighborhood of
the cultivated plains of sessa, the massicau mountain, and falernian
fields,--names, which call up associations, that must live while good
poetry and good wine shall be held in honor.

[26] mariana, hist. de espana, tom. ii. lib. 28, cap. 5.--guicciardini,
istoria, tom. i. lib. 6, p. 328.--machiavelli, legazione prima a roma,
let. 44.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 22.--chronica del gran capitan,
cap. 107, 108.--the neapolitan conquests, it will be remembered, were
undertaken exclusively for the crown of aragon, the revenues of which were
far more limited than those of castile.

[27] bernaldez, reyes catolicos, ms., cap. 188.--chronica del gran
capitan, lib. 2, cap. 108.--garibay, compendio, tom. ii. lib. 19, cap,
16.--guicciardini, istoria, lib. 6, p. 328.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib.
5, cap. 58.

[28] giovio, vita magni gonsalvi, fol. 265.--garnier, hist. de france,
tom. v. p. 445.--zurita, anales, tom. v. lib. 5, cap. 59.--buonaccorsi,
diario, fol. 85.--ulloa, vita di carlo v., fol. 22.--varillas, hist. de
louis xii., tom. i. pp. 401, 402.

[29] garnier, hist. de france, tom. v. pp. 440-443.--giovio, vitae illust.
virorum, fol. 264, 265.--guicciardini, istoria, tom. i. lib. 6, p. 329.--
machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let. 44.--st. gelais, hist. de louys
xii., pp. 173, 174.

[30] chronica del gran capitan, lib. 2, cap. 106.--memoires de bayard,
chap. 25, apud petitot, collection des memoires, tom. xv.--varillas, hist.
de louis xii., tom. i. p. 417.--quintana, espanoles celebres, tom. i. pp.
288-290.--machiavelli, legazione prima a roma, let. 39, 44.

[31] compare the prose romances of d'auton, of the "loyal serviteur" of
bayard, and the no less loyal biographer of the great captain, with the
poetic ones of ariosto, berni, and the like.

  "magnanima menzogna! or quando e il vero
  si bello, che si possa a te preporre?"




chapter xv.

italian wars.--rout of the garigliano.--treaty with france.--gonsalvo's
military conduct.

1503, 1504.

gonsalvo crosses the river.--consternation of the french.--action near
gaeta.--hotly contested.--the french defeated.--gaeta surrenders.--public
enthusiasm.--treaty with france.--review of gonsalvo's military conduct.--
results of the campaign.


seven weeks had now elapsed, since the two armies had lain in sight of
each other without any decided movement on either side. during this time,
the great captain had made repeated efforts to strengthen himself, through
the intervention of the spanish ambassador, francisco de rojas, [1] by
reinforcements from rome. his negotiations were chiefly directed to secure
the alliance of the orsini, a powerful family, long involved in a bitter
feud with the colonnas, then in the spanish service. a reconciliation
between these noble houses was at length happily effected; and bartolomeo
d'alviano, the head of the orsini, agreed to enlist under the spanish
commander with three thousand men. this arrangement was finally brought
about through the good offices of the venetian minister at rome, who even
advanced a considerable sum of money towards the payment of the new
levies. [2]

the appearance of this corps, with one of the most able and valiant of the
italian captains at its head, revived the drooping spirits of the camp.
soon after his arrival, alviano strongly urged gonsalvo to abandon his
original plan of operations, and avail himself of his augmented strength
to attack the enemy in his own quarters. the spanish commander had
intended to confine himself wholly to the defensive, and, too unequal in
force to meet the french in the open field, as before noticed, had
intrenched himself in his present strong position, with the fixed purpose
of awaiting the enemy there. circumstances had now greatly changed. the
original inequality was diminished by the arrival of the italian levies,
and still further compensated by the present disorderly state of the
french army. he knew, moreover, that in the most perilous enterprises, the
assailing party gathers an enthusiasm and an impetus in its career, which
counterbalance large numerical odds; while the party taken by surprise is
proportionably disconcerted, and prepared, as it were, for defeat before a
blow is struck. from these considerations, the cautious general acquiesced
in alviano's project to cross the garigliano, by establishing a bridge at
a point opposite suzio, a small place garrisoned by the french on the
right bank, about four miles above their head-quarters. the time for the
attack was fixed as soon as possible after the approaching christmas, when
the french, occupied with the festivities of the season, might be thrown
off their guard. [3]

this day of general rejoicing to the christian world at length arrived. it
brought little joy to the spaniards, buried in the depths of these dreary
morasses, destitute of most of the necessaries of life, and with scarcely
any other means of resisting the climate, than those afforded by their
iron constitutions and invincible courage. they celebrated the day,
however, with all the devotional feeling, and the imposing solemnities,
with which it is commemorated by the roman catholic church; and the
exercises of religion, rendered more impressive by their situation, served
to exalt still higher the heroic constancy, which had sustained them under
such unparalleled sufferings.

in the mean while, the materials for the bridge were collected, and the
work went forward with such despatch, that on the 28th of december all was
in readiness for carrying the plan of attack into execution. the task of
laying the bridge across the river was intrusted to alviano, who had
charge of the van. the central and main division of the army under
gonsalvo was to cross at the same point; while andrada at the head of the
rear-guard was to force a passage at the old bridge, lower down the
stream, opposite to the tower of the garigliano. [4]

the night was dark and stormy. alviano performed the duty intrusted to him
with such silence and celerity, that the work was completed without
attracting the enemy's notice. he then crossed over with the van-guard,
consisting chiefly of cavalry, supported by navarro, paredes, and pizarro;
and, falling on the sleeping garrison of suzio, cut to pieces all who
offered resistance.

the report of the spaniards having passed the river spread far and wide,
and soon reached the head-quarters of the marquis of saluzzo, near the
tower of the garigliano. the french commander-in-chief, who believed that
the spaniards were lying on the other side of the river, as torpid as the
snakes in their own marshes, was as much astounded by the event as if a
thunderbolt had burst over his head from a cloudless sky. he lost no time,
however, in rallying such of his scattered forces as he could assemble,
and in the mean while despatched ives d'allegre with a body of horse to
hold the enemy in check, till he could make good his own retreat on gaeta.
his first step was to demolish the bridge near his own quarters, cutting
the moorings of the boats and turning them adrift down the river. he
abandoned his tents and baggage, together with nine of his heaviest
cannon; leaving even the sick and wounded to the mercy of the enemy,
rather than encumber himself with anything that should retard his march.
the remainder of the artillery he sent forward in the van. the infantry
followed next, and the rear, in which saluzzo took his own station, was
brought up by the men-at-arms to cover the retreat.

before allegre could reach suzio, the whole spanish army had passed the
garigliano, and formed on the right bank. unable to face such superior
numbers, he fell back with precipitation, and joined himself to the main
body of the french, now in full retreat on gaeta. [5]

gonsalvo, afraid the french might escape him, sent forward prospero
colonna, with a corps of light horse, to annoy and retard their march
until he could come up. keeping the right bank of the river with the main
body, he marched rapidly through the deserted camp of the enemy, leaving
little leisure for his men to glean the rich spoil, which lay tempting
them on every side. it was not long before he came up with the french,
whose movements were greatly retarded by the difficulty of dragging their
guns over the ground completely saturated with rain. the retreat was
conducted, however, in excellent order; they were eminently favored by the
narrowness of the road, which, allowing but a comparatively small body of
troops on either side to come into action, made success chiefly depend on
the relative merits of these. the french rear, as already stated, was made
up of their men-at-arms, including bayard, sandricourt, la fayette, and
others of their bravest chivalry, who, armed at all points, found no great
difficulty in beating off the light troops which formed the advance of the
spaniards. at every bridge, stream, and narrow pass, which afforded a
favorable position, the french cavalry closed their ranks, and made a
resolute stand to gain time for the columns in advance.

in this way, alternately halting and retreating, with perpetual
skirmishes, though without much loss on either side, they reached the
bridge before mola di gaeta. here, some of the gun-carriages breaking down
or being overturned occasioned considerable delay and confusion. the
infantry, pressing on, became entangled with the artillery. the marquis of
saluzzo endeavored to avail himself of the strong position afforded by the
bridge to restore order. a desperate struggle ensued. the french knights
dashed boldly into the spanish ranks, driving back for a time the tide of
pursuit. the chevalier bayard, who was seen as usual in the front of
danger, had three horses killed under him; and, at length, carried forward
by his ardor into the thickest of the enemy, was retrieved with difficulty
from their hands by a desperate charge of his friend sandricourt. [6]

the spaniards, shaken by the violence of the assault, seemed for a moment
to hesitate; but gonsalvo had now time to bring up his men-at-arms, who
sustained the faltering columns, and renewed the combat on more equal
terms. he himself was in the hottest of the _melee_; and at one time
was exposed to imminent hazard by his horse's losing his footing on the
slippery soil, and coming with him to the ground. the general fortunately
experienced no injury, and, quickly recovering himself, continued to
animate his followers by his voice and intrepid bearing, as before.

the fight had now lasted two hours. the spaniards, although still in
excellent heart, were faint with fatigue and want of food, having
travelled six leagues, without breaking their fast since the preceding
evening. it was, therefore, with no little anxiety, that gonsalvo looked
for the coming up of his rear-guard, left, as the reader will remember,
under andrada at the lower bridge, to decide the fortune of the day.

the welcome spectacle at length presented itself. the dark columns of the
spaniards were seen, at first faint in the distance, by degrees growing
more and more distinct to the eye. andrada had easily carried the french
redoubt on his side of the garigliano; but it was not without difficulty
and delay, that he recovered the scattered boats which the french had set
adrift down the stream, and finally succeeded in re-establishing his
communications with the opposite bank. having accomplished this, he
rapidly advanced by a more direct road, to the east of that lately
traversed by gonsalvo along the sea-side, in pursuit of the french. the
latter beheld with dismay the arrival of this fresh body of troops, who
seemed to have dropped from the clouds on the field of battle. they
scarcely waited for the shock before they broke, and gave way in all
directions. the disabled carriages of the artillery, which clogged up the
avenues in the rear, increased the confusion among the fugitives, and the
foot were trampled down without mercy under the heels of their own
cavalry, in the eagerness of the latter to extricate themselves from their
perilous situation. the spanish light horse followed up their advantage
with the alacrity of vengeance long delayed, inflicting bloody retribution
for all they had so long suffered in the marshes of sessa.

at no great distance from the bridge the road takes two directions, the
one towards itri, the other to gaeta. the bewildered fugitives here
separated; by far the greater part keeping the latter route. gonsalvo sent
forward a body of horse under navarro and pedro de la paz by a short cut
across the country, to intercept their flight. a large number fell into
his hands in consequence of this manoeuvre; but the greater part of those
who escaped the sword succeeded in throwing themselves into gaeta. [7]

the great captain took up his quarters that night in the neighboring
village of castellone. his brave followers had great need of refreshment,
having fasted and fought through the whole day, and that under a driving
storm of rain which had not ceased for a moment. thus terminated the
battle, or rout, as it is commonly called, of the garigliano, the most
important in its results of all gonsalvo's victories, and furnishing a
suitable close to his brilliant military career. [8] the loss of the
french is computed at from three to four thousand men, left dead on the
field, together with all their baggage, colors, and splendid train of
artillery. the spaniards must have suffered severely during the sharp
conflict on the bridge; but no estimate of their loss is to be met with,
in any native or foreign writer. [9] it was observed that the 29th of
december, on which this battle was won, came on friday, the same ominous
day of the week, which had so often proved auspicious to the spaniards
under the present reign. [10]

the disparity of the forces actually engaged was probably not great, since
the extent of country over which the french were quartered prevented many
of them from coming up in time for action. several corps, who succeeded in
reaching the field at the close of the fight, were seized with such a
panic as to throw down their arms without attempting resistance. [11] the
admirable artillery, on which the french placed chief reliance, was not
only of no service, but of infinite mischief to them, as we have seen. the
brunt of the battle fell on their chivalry, which bore itself throughout
the day with the spirit and gallantry worthy of its ancient renown; never
flinching, till the arrival of the spanish rear-guard fresh in the field,
at so critical a juncture, turned the scale in their adversaries' favor.

early on the following morning, gonsalvo made preparations for storming
the heights of mount orlando, which overlooked the city of gaeta. such was
the despondency of its garrison, however, that this strong position, which
bade defiance a few months before to the most desperate efforts of spanish
valor, was now surrendered without a struggle. the same feeling of
despondency had communicated itself to the garrison of gaeta; and, before
navarro could bring the batteries of mount orlando to bear upon the city,
a flag of truce arrived from the marquis of saluzzo with proposals for
capitulation.

this was more than the great captain could have ventured to promise
himself. the french were in great force; the fortifications of the place
in excellent repair; it was well provided with artillery and ammunition,
and with provisions for ten days at least; while their fleet, riding in
the harbor, afforded the means of obtaining supplies from leghorn, genoa,
and other friendly ports. but the french had lost all heart; they were
sorely wasted by disease; their buoyant self-confidence was gone, and
their spirits broken by the series of reverses, which had followed without
interruption from the first hour of the campaign, to the last disastrous
affair of the garigliano. the very elements seemed to have leagued against
them. further efforts they deemed a fruitless struggle against destiny;
and they now looked with melancholy longing to their native land, eager
only to quit these ill-omened shores for ever.

the great captain made no difficulty in granting such terms, as, while
they had a show of liberality, secured him the most important fruits of
victory. this suited his cautious temper far better than pressing a
desperate foe to extremity. he was, moreover, with all his successes, in
no condition to do so; he was without funds, and, as usual, deeply in
arrears to his army; while there was scarcely a ration of bread, says an
italian historian, in his whole camp. [12]

it was agreed by the terms of capitulation, january 1st, 1504, that the
french should evacuate gaeta at once, and deliver it up to the spaniards
with its artillery, munitions, and military stores of every description.
the prisoners on both sides, including those taken in the preceding
campaign, an arrangement greatly to the advantage of the enemy, were to be
restored; and the army in gaeta was to be allowed a free passage by land
or sea, as they should prefer, to their own country. [13]

from the moment hostilities were brought to a close; gonsalvo displayed
such generous sympathy for his late enemies, and such humanity in
relieving them, as to reflect more honor on his character than all his
victories. he scrupulously enforced the faithful performance of the
treaty, and severely punished any violence offered to the french by his
own men. his benign and courteous demeanor towards the vanquished, so
remote from the images of terror with which he had been, hitherto
associated in their minds, excited unqualified admiration; and they
testified their sense of his amiable qualities, by speaking of him as the
"gentil capitaine et gentil cavalier." [14]

the news of the rout of the garigliano and the surrender of gaeta diffused
general gloom and consternation over france. there was scarcely a family
of rank, says a writer of that country, that had not some one of its
members involved in these sad disasters. [15] the court went into
mourning. the king, mortified at the discomfiture of all his lofty
schemes, by the foe whom he despised, shut himself up in his palace,
refusing access to every one, until the agitation of his spirits threw him
into an illness, which had wellnigh proved fatal.

meanwhile his exasperated feelings found an object on which to vent
themselves in the unfortunate garrison of gaeta, who so pusillanimously
abandoned their post to return to their own country. he commanded them to
winter in italy, and not to recross the alps without further orders. he
sentenced sandricourt and allegre to banishment for insubordination to
their commander-in-chief; the latter, for his conduct, more particularly,
before the battle of cerignola; and he hanged up the commissaries of the
army, whose infamous peculations had been a principal cause of its ruin.
[16]

but the impotent wrath of their monarch was not needed to fill the bitter
cup, which the french soldiers were now draining to the dregs. a large
number of those, who embarked for genoa, died of the maladies contracted
during their long bivouac in the marshes of minturnae. the rest recrossed
the alps into france, too desperate to heed their master's prohibition.
those who took their way by land suffered still more severely from the
italian peasantry, who retaliated in full measure the barbarities they had
so long endured from the french. they were seen wandering like spectres
along the high roads and principal cities on the route, pining with cold
and famine; and all the hospitals in rome, as well as the stables, sheds,
and every other place, however mean, affording shelter, were filled with
the wretched vagabonds, eager only to find some obscure retreat to die in.

the chiefs of the expedition fared little better. among others, the
marquis of saluzzo, soon after reaching genoa, was carried off by a fever,
caused by his distress of mind. sandricourt, too haughty to endure
disgrace, laid violent hands on himself. allegre, more culpable, but more
courageous, survived to be reconciled with his sovereign, and to die a
soldier's death on the field of battle. [17]

such are the dismal colors in which the french historians depict the last
struggle made by their monarch for the recovery of naples. few military
expeditions have commenced under more brilliant and imposing auspices; few
have been conducted in so ill-advised a manner through their whole
progress; and none attended in their close with more indiscriminate and
overwhelming ruin.

on the 3d of january, 1504, gonsalvo made his entry into gaeta; and the
thunders of his ordnance, now for the first time heard from its
battlements, announced that this strong key to the dominions of naples had
passed into the hands of aragon. after a short delay for the refreshment
of his troops, he set out for the capital. but, amidst the general jubilee
which greeted his return, he was seized with a fever, brought on by the
incessant fatigue and high mental excitement in which he had been kept for
the last four months. the attack was severe, and the event for some time
doubtful. during this state of suspense the public mind was in the deepest
agitation. the popular manners of gonsalvo had won the hearts of the giddy
people of naples, who transferred their affections, indeed, as readily as
their allegiance; and prayers and vows for his restoration, were offered
up in all the churches and monasteries of the city. his excellent
constitution at length got the better of his disease. as soon as this
favorable result was ascertained, the whole population, rushing to the
other extreme, abandoned itself to a delirium of joy; and, when he was
sufficiently recovered to give them audience, men of all ranks thronged to
castel nuovo to tender their congratulations, and obtain a sight of the
hero, who now returned to their capital, for the third time, with the
laurel of victory on his brow. every tongue, says his enthusiastic
biographer, was eloquent in his praise; some dwelling on his noble port,
and the beauty of his countenance; others on the elegance and amenity of
his manners; and all dazzled by a spirit of munificence, which would have
become royalty itself. [18]

the tide of panegyric was swelled by more than one bard, who sought,
though with indifferent success, to catch inspiration from so glorious a
theme; trusting doubtless that his liberal hand would not stint the
recompense to the precise measure of desert. amid this general burst of
adulation, the muse of sannazaro, worth all his tribe, was alone silent;
for the trophies of the conqueror were raised on the ruins of that royal
house, under which the bard had been so long sheltered; and this silence,
so rare in his tuneful brethren, must be admitted to reflect more credit
on his name, than the best he ever sung. [19]

the first business of gonsalvo was to call together the different orders
of the state, and receive their oaths of allegiance to king ferdinand. he
next occupied himself with the necessary arrangements for the
reorganization of the government, and for reforming various abuses which
had crept into the administration of justice, more particularly. in these
attempts to introduce order, he was not a little thwarted, however, by the
insubordination of his own soldiery, they loudly clamored for the
discharge of the arrears, still shamefully protracted, till, their
discontents swelling to open mutiny, they forcibly seized on two of the
principal places in the kingdom as security for the payment. gonsalvo
chastised their insolence by disbanding several of the most refractory
companies, and sending them home for punishment. he endeavored to relieve
them in part by raising contributions from the neapolitans. but the
soldiers took the matter into their own hands, oppressing the unfortunate
people on whom they were quartered in a manner which rendered their
condition scarcely more tolerable, than when exposed to the horrors of
actual war. [20] this was the introduction, according to guicciardini, of
those systematic military exactions in time of peace, which became so
common afterwards in italy, adding an inconceivable amount to the long
catalogue of woes which afflicted that unhappy land. [21]

amidst his manifold duties, gonsalvo did not forget the gallant officers
who had borne with him the burdens of the war, and he requited their
services in a princely style, better suited to his feelings than his
interests, as subsequently appeared. among them were navarro, mendoza,
andrada, benavides, leyva, the italians alviano and the two colonnas, most
of whom lived to display the lessons of tactics, which they learned under
this great commander, on a still wider theatre of glory, in the reign of
charles the fifth. he made them grants of cities, fortresses, and
extensive lands, according to their various claims, to be held as fiefs of
the crown. all this was done with the previous sanction of his royal
master, ferdinand the catholic. they did some violence, however, to his
more economical spirit, and he was heard somewhat peevishly to exclaim,
"it boots little for gonsalvo de cordova to have won a kingdom for me, if
he lavishes it all away before it comes into my hands." it began to be
perceived at court that the great captain was too powerful for a subject.
[22]

meanwhile, louis the twelfth was filled with serious apprehensions for the
fate of his possessions in the north of italy. his former allies, the
emperor maximilian and the republic of venice, the latter more especially,
had shown many indications, not merely of coldness to himself, but of a
secret understanding with his rival, the king of spain. the restless pope,
julius the second, had schemes of his own, wholly independent of france.
the republics of pisa and genoa, the latter one of her avowed
dependencies, had entered into correspondence with the great captain, and
invited him to assume their protection; while several of the disaffected
party in milan had assured him of their active support, in case he would
march with a sufficient force to overturn the existing government. indeed,
not only france, but europe in general, expected that the spanish
commander would avail himself of the present crisis, to push his
victorious arms into upper italy, revolutionize tuscany in his way, and,
wresting milan from the french, drive them, crippled and disheartened by
their late reverses, beyond the alps. [23]

but gonsalvo had occupation enough on his hands in settling the disordered
state of naples. king ferdinand, his sovereign, notwithstanding the
ambition of universal conquest absurdly imputed to him by the french
writers, had no design to extend his acquisitions beyond what he could
permanently maintain. his treasury, never overflowing, was too deeply
drained by the late heavy demands on it, for him so soon to embark on
another perilous enterprise, that must rouse anew the swarms of enemies,
who seemed willing to rest in quiet after their long and exhausting
struggle; nor is there any reason to suppose he sincerely contemplated
such a movement for a moment. [24]

the apprehension of it, however, answered ferdinand's purpose, by
preparing the french monarch to arrange his differences with his rival, as
the latter now earnestly desired, by negotiation. indeed, two spanish
ministers had resided during the greater part of the war at the french
court, with the view of improving the first opening that should occur for
accomplishing this object; and by their agency a treaty was concluded, to
continue for three years, which guaranteed to aragon the undisturbed
possession of her conquests during that period. the chief articles
provided for the immediate cessation of hostilities between the
belligerents, and the complete re-establishment of their commercial
relations and intercourse, with the exception of naples, from which the
french were to be excluded. the spanish crown was to have full power to
reduce all refractory places in that kingdom; and the contracting parties
solemnly pledged themselves, each to render no assistance, secretly or
openly, to the enemies of the other. the treaty, which was to run from the
25th of february, 1504, was signed by the french king and the spanish
plenipotentiaries at lyons, on the 11th of that month, and ratified by
ferdinand and isabella, at the convent of santa maria de la mejorada, the
31st of march following. [25]

there was still a small spot in the heart of naples, comprehending venosa
and several adjoining towns, where louis d'ars and his brave associates
yet held out against the spanish arms. although cut off by the operation
of this treaty from the hope of further support from home, the french
knight disdained to surrender; but sallied out at the head of his little
troop of gallant veterans, and thus, armed at all points, says brantome,
with lance in rest, took his way through naples, and the centre of italy.
he marched in battle array, levying contributions for his support on the
places through which he passed. in this manner he entered france, and
presented himself before the court at blois. the king and queen, delighted
with his prowess, came forward to welcome him, and made good cheer, says
the old chronicler, for himself and his companions, whom they recompensed
with liberal largesses, proffering at the same time any boon to the brave
knight, which he should demand for himself. the latter in return simply
requested that his old comrade ives d'allegre should be recalled from
exile. this trait of magnanimity, when contrasted with the general
ferocity of the times, has something in it inexpressibly pleasing. it
shows, like others recorded of the french gentlemen of that period, that
the age of chivalry,--the chivalry of romance, indeed,--had not wholly
passed away. [26]

the pacification of lyons sealed the fate of naples; and, while it
terminated the wars in that kingdom, closed the military career of
gonsalvo de cordova. it is impossible to contemplate the magnitude of the
results, achieved with such slender resources, and in the face of such
overwhelming odds, without deep admiration for the genius of the man by
whom they were accomplished.

his success, it is true, is imputable in part to the signal errors of his
adversaries. the magnificent expedition of charles the eighth failed to
produce any permanent impression, chiefly in consequence of the
precipitation with which it had been entered into, without sufficient
concert with the italian states, who became a formidable enemy when united
in his rear. he did not even avail himself of his temporary acquisition of
naples to gather support from the attachment of his new subjects. far from
incorporating with them, he was regarded as a foreigner and an enemy, and,
as such, expelled by the joint action of all italy from its bosom, as soon
as it had recovered sufficient strength to rally.

louis the twelfth profited by the errors of his predecessor. his
acquisitions in the milanese formed a basis for future operations; and by
negotiation and otherwise he secured the alliance and the interests of the
various italian governments on his side. these preliminary arrangements
were followed by preparations every way commensurate with his object. he
failed in the first campaign, however, by intrusting the command to
incompetent hands, consulting birth rather than talent or experience.

in the succeeding campaigns, his failure, though partly chargeable on
himself, was less so than on circumstances beyond his control. the first
of these was the long detention of the army before rome by cardinal
d'amboise, and its consequent exposure to the unexampled severity of the
ensuing winter. a second was the fraudulent conduct of the commissaries,
implying, no doubt, some degree of negligence in the person who appointed
them; and lastly, the want of a suitable commander-in-chief of the army.
la tremouille being ill, and d'aubigny a prisoner in the hands of the
enemy, there appeared no one among the french qualified to cope with the
spanish general. the marquis of mantua, independently of the disadvantage
of being a foreigner, was too timid in council, and dilatory in conduct,
to be any way competent to this difficult task.

if his enemies, however, committed great errors, it is altogether owing to
gonsalvo that he was in a situation to take advantage of them. nothing
could be more unpromising than his position on first entering calabria.
military operations had been conducted in spain on principles totally
different from those which prevailed in the rest of europe. this was the
case especially in the late moorish wars, where the old tactics and the
character of the ground brought light cavalry chiefly into use. this,
indeed, constituted his principal strength at this period; for his
infantry, though accustomed to irregular service, was indifferently armed
and disciplined. an important revolution, however, had occurred in the
other parts of europe. the infantry had there regained the superiority
which it maintained in the days of the greeks and romans. the experiment
had been made on more than one bloody field; and it was found that the
solid columns of swiss and german pikes not only bore down all opposition
in their onward march, but presented an impregnable barrier, not to be
shaken by the most desperate charges of the best heavy-armed cavalry. it
was against these dreaded battalions that gonsalvo was now called to
measure for the first time the bold but rudely armed and comparatively raw
recruits from galicia and the asturias.

he lost his first battle, into which it should be remembered he was
precipitated against his will. he proceeded afterwards with the greatest
caution, gradually familiarizing his men with the aspect and usages of the
enemy whom they held in such awe, before bringing them again to a direct
encounter. he put himself to school during this whole campaign, carefully
acquainting himself with the tactics, discipline, and novel arms of his
adversaries, and borrowing just so much as he could incorporate into the
ancient system of the spaniards, without discarding the latter altogether.
thus, while he retained the short sword and buckler of his countrymen, he
fortified his battalions with a large number of spearmen, after the german
fashion. the arrangement is highly commended by the sagacious machiavelli,
who considers it as combining the advantages of both systems, since, while
the long spear served all the purposes of resistance, or even of attack on
level ground, the short swords and targets enabled their wearers, as
already noticed, to cut in under the dense array of hostile pikes, and
bring the enemy to close quarters, where his formidable weapon was of no
avail. [27]

while gonsalvo made this innovation in the arms and tactics, he paid equal
attention to the formation of a suitable character in his soldiery. the
circumstances in which he was placed at barleta, and on the garigliano,
imperatively demanded this. without food, clothes, or pay, without the
chance even of retrieving his desperate condition by venturing a blow at
the enemy, the spanish soldier was required to remain passive. to do this
demanded, patience, abstinence, strict subordination, and a degree of
resolution far higher than that required to combat obstacles, however
formidable in themselves, where active exertion, which tasks the utmost
energies of the soldier, renews his spirits and raises them to a contempt
of danger. it was calling on him, in short, to begin with achieving that
most difficult of all victories, the victory over himself.

all this the spanish commander effected. he infused into his men a portion
of his own invincible energy. he inspired a love of his person, which led
them to emulate his example, and a confidence in his genius and resources,
which supported them under all their privations by a firm reliance on a
fortunate issue. his manners were distinguished by a graceful courtesy,
less encumbered with etiquette than was usual with persons of his high
rank in castile. he knew well the proud and independent feelings of the
spanish soldier; and, far from annoying him by unnecessary restraints,
showed the most liberal indulgence at all times. but his kindness was
tempered with severity, which displayed itself, on such occasions as
required interposition, in a manner that rarely failed to repress
everything like insubordination. the reader will readily recall an example
of this in the mutiny before tarento; and it was doubtless by the
assertion of similar power, that he was so long able to keep in check his
german mercenaries, distinguished above the troops of every other nation
by their habitual license and contempt of authority.

while gonsalvo relied so freely on the hardy constitution and patient
habits of the spaniards, he trusted no less to the deficiency of these
qualities in the french, who, possessing little of the artificial
character formed under the stern training of later times, resembled their
gaulish ancestors in the facility with which they were discouraged by
unexpected obstacles, and the difficulty with which they could be brought
to rally. [28] in this he did not miscalculate. the french infantry, drawn
from the militia of the country, hastily collected and soon to be
disbanded, and the independent nobility and gentry who composed the
cavalry service, were alike difficult to be brought within the strict curb
of military rule. the severe trials, which steeled the souls, and gave
sinewy strength to the constitutions, of the spanish soldiers, impaired
those of their enemies, introduced divisions into their councils, and
relaxed the whole tone of discipline. gonsalvo watched the operation of
all this, and, coolly waiting the moment when his weary and disheartened
adversary should be thrown off his guard, collected all his strength for a
decisive blow, by which to terminate the action. such was the history of
those memorable campaigns, which closed with the brilliant victories of
cerignola and the garigliano.

in a review of his military conduct, we must not overlook his politic
deportment towards the italians, altogether the reverse of the careless
and insolent bearing of the french. he availed himself liberally of their
superior science, showing great deference, and confiding the most
important trusts, to their officers. [29] far from the reserve usually
shown to foreigners, he appeared insensible to national distinctions, and
ardently embraced them as companions in arms, embarked in a common cause
with himself. in their tourney with the french before barleta, to which
the whole nation attached such importance as a vindication of national
honor, they were entirely supported by gonsalvo, who furnished them with
arms, secured a fair field of fight, and shared the triumph of the victors
as that of his own countrymen,--paying those delicate attentions, which
cost far less, indeed, but to an honorable mind are of greater value, than
more substantial benefits. he conciliated the good-will of the italian
states by various important services; of the venetians, by his gallant
defence of their possessions in the levant; of the people of rome, by
delivering them from the pirates of ostia; while he succeeded,
notwithstanding the excesses of his soldiery, in captivating the giddy
neapolitans to such a degree, by his affable manners and splendid style of
life, as seemed to efface from their minds every recollection of the last
and most popular of their monarchs, the unfortunate frederic.

the distance of gonsalvo's theatre of operations from his own country,
apparently most discouraging, proved extremely favorable to his purposes.
the troops, cut off from retreat by a wide sea and an impassable mountain
barrier, had no alternative but to conquer or to die. their long
continuance in the field without disbanding gave them all the stern,
inflexible qualities of a standing army; and, as they served through so
many successive campaigns under the banner of the same leader, they were
drilled in a system of tactics far steadier and more uniform than could be
acquired under a variety of commanders, however able. under these
circumstances, which so well fitted them for receiving impressions, the
spanish army was gradually moulded into the form determined by the will of
its great chief.

when we look at the amount offered at the disposal of gonsalvo, it appears
so paltry, especially compared with the gigantic apparatus of later wars,
that it may well suggest disparaging ideas of the whole contest. to judge
correctly, we must direct our eyes to the result. with this insignificant
force, we shall then see the kingdom of naples conquered, and the best
generals and armies of france annihilated; an important innovation
effected in military science; the art of mining, if not invented, carried
to unprecedented perfection; a thorough reform introduced in the arms and
discipline of the spanish soldier; and the organization completed of that
valiant infantry, which is honestly eulogized by a french writer, as
irresistible in attack, and impossible to rout; [30] and which carried the
banners of spain victorious, for more than a century, over the most
distant parts of europe.
