

chapter i.

tacitus could barely have written the annals.

i. from the chronological point of view.--ii. the silence
preserved about that work by all writers till the fifteenth
century.--iii. the age of the mss. containing the annals.


i. the annals and the history of tacitus are like two houses in
ruins: dismantled of their original proportions they perpetuate
the splendour of roman historiography, as the crumbling remnants
of the coliseum preserve from oblivion the magnificence of roman
architecture. some of the subtlest intellects, keen in criticism
and expert in scholarship, have, for centuries, endeavoured with
considerable pains, though not with success in every instance, to
free the imperfect pieces from difficulties, as the priesthood of
the quindecimvirs, generation after generation, assiduously, yet
vainly, strove to clear from perplexities the mutilated books of
the sibyls. i purpose to bring,--parodying a passage of the good
sieur chanvallon,--not freestone and marble for their restoration,
but a critical hammer to knock down the loose bricks that, for
more than four centuries, have shown large holes in several
places.

tacitus is raised by his genius to a height, which lifts him above
the reach of the critic. he shines in the firmament of letters
like a sun before whose lustre all, parsee-like, bow down in
worship. preceding generations have read him with reverence and
admiration: as one of the greatest masters of history, he must
continue to be so read. but though neither praise nor censure can
exalt or impair his fame, truth and justice call for a passionless
inquiry into the nature and character of works presenting such
difference in structure, and such contradictions in a variety of
matters as the history and the annals.

the belief is general that tacitus wrote roman history in the
retrograde order, in which hume wrote the history of england. why
hume pursued that method is obvious: eager to gain fame in
letters,--seeing his opportunity by supplying a good history of
england,--knowing how interest attaches to times near us while all
but absence of sympathy accompanies those that are remote,--and
meaning to exclude from his plan the incompleted dynasty under
which he lived,--he commenced with the house of stuart, continued
with that of tudor, and finished with the remaining portion from
the roman invasion to the accession of henry vii. but why tacitus
should have decided in favour of the inverse of chronological
order is by no means clear. he could not have been actuated by any
of the motives which influenced hume. rome, with respect to her
history, was not in the position that england was, with respect to
hers, in the middle of the last century. all the remarkable
occurrences during the 820 years from her foundation to the office
of emperor ceasing as the inheritance of the julian family on the
death of nero, had been recorded by many writers that rendered
needless the further labours of the historian. tacitus states this
at the commencement of his history, and as a reason why he began
that work with the accession of galba: "initium mihi operis
servius galba iterum, titus vinius consules erunt; nam post
conditam urbem, octingentos et viginti prioris aevi annos multi
auctores retulerunt." (hist. i. 1.) after this admission, it is
absolutely unaccountable that he should revert to the year since
the building of the city 769, and continue writing to the year
819, going over ground that, according to his own account, had
been gone over before most admirably, every one of the numerous
historians having written in his view, "with an equal amount of
forcible expression and independent opinion"--"pari eloquentia ac
libertate." thus, by his own showing, he performed a work which he
knew to be superfluous in recounting events that occurred in the
time of tiberius, caligula, claudius and nero.

what authority have we that he did this? certainly, not the
authority of those who knew best--the ancients. they do not
mention, in their meagre accounts of him, the names of his
writings, the number of which we, perhaps, glean from casual
remarks dropped by pliny the younger in his epistles. he says
(vii. 20), "i have read your book, and with the utmost care have
made remarks upon such passages, as i think ought to be altered or
expunged." "librum tuum legi, et quam diligentissime potui,
adnotavi, quae commutanda, quae eximenda arbitrarer." in a second
letter (viii. 7) he alludes to another (or it might be the same)
"book," which his friend had sent him "not as a master to a
master, nor as a disciple to a disciple, but as a master to a
disciple:" "neque ut magistro magister, neque ut discipulo
discipulus ... sed ut discipulo magister ... librum misisti." that
tacitus was not the author of one work only is clear from pliny in
another of his letters (vi. 16) speaking in the plural of what his
friend had written: "the immortality of your writings:"--
"scriptorum tuorum aeternitas;" also of "my uncle both by his own,
and your works:"--"avunculus meus et suis libris et tuis." in the
letter already referred to (vii. 20), tacitus is further spoken of
as having written, at least, two historical works, the immortality
of which pliny predicted without fear of proving a false prophet:
"auguror, nec me fallit augurium, historias tuas immortales
futuras." from these passages it would seem that the works of
tacitus were, at the most, three.

if his works were only three in number, everything points in
preference to the books of history, of which we possess but five;
the treatise on the different manners of the various tribes that
peopled germany in his day; and the life of his father-in-law,
agricola. nobody but fabius planciades fulgentius, bishop of
carthage, supposes that he wrote a book of facetiae or pleasant
tales and anecdotes, as may be seen by reference to the episcopal
writer's treatise on archaic or obsolete words, where explaining
"elogium" to mean "hereditary disease," he continues, "as
cornelius tacitus says in his book of facetiae; 'therefore pained
in the cutting off of children who had hereditary disease left to
them'": "elogium est haereditas in malo; sicut cornelius tacitus
ait in libro facetiarum: 'caesis itaque motum elogio in filiis
derelicto.'" (de vocibus antiquis. p. 151. basle ed. 1549).
justus lipsius doubts whether the discourse on the causes of the
corruption of latin eloquence proceeded from tacitus, or the other
roman to whom many impute it, quintilian, for he says in his
preface to that dialogue: "what will it matter whether we
attribute it to tacitus, or, as i once thought, to marcus fabius
quinctilianus? ... though the age of quinctilianus seems to have
been a little too old for this discourse to be by that young man.
therefore, i have my doubts." "incommodi quid erit, sive tacito
tribuamus; sive m. fabio quinctiliano, ut mihi olim visim? ...
aetas tamen quinctiliani paullo grandior fuisse videtur, quam ut
hic sermo illo juvene. itaque ambigo." (p. 470. antwerp ed. 1607.)
enough will be said in the course of this discussion to carry
conviction to the minds of those who can be convinced by facts and
arguments that tacitus did not write the annals.

chronology, in the first place, prevents our regarding him as the
author. though we know as little of his life as of his writings--
and though no ancient mentions the date or place of his birth, or
the time of his death,--we can form a conjecture when he
flourished by comparing his age with that of his friend, pliny the
younger. pliny died in the year 13 of the second century at the
age of 52, so that pliny was born a.d. 61. tacitus was by several
years his senior. otherwise pliny would not have spoken of himself
as a disciple looking up to him with reverence as to "a master";
"the duty of submitting to his influence," and "a desire to obey
his advice":--"tu magister, ego contra"--(ep. viii. 7): "cedere
auctoritati tuae debeam" (ep. i. 20): "cupio praeceptis tuis
parere" (ep. ix. 10); nor would he describe himself as "a mere
stripling when his friend was at the height of fame and in a proud
position": "equidem adolescentulus, quum jam tu fama gloriaque
floreres" (ep. vii. 20); nor of their being, "all but
contemporaries in age": "duos homines, aetate propemodum aequales"
(ep. vii. 20). from these remarks chiefly and a few other
circumstances, the modern biographers of tacitus suppose there was
a difference of ten or eleven years between that ancient historian
and pliny, and fix the date of his birth about a.d. 52.

this is reconcilable with the belief of tacitus being the author
of the annals; for when the boundaries of rome are spoken of in
that work as being extended to the red sea in terms as if it were
a recent extension--"claustra ... romani imperii, quod _nunc_
rubrum ad mare patescit" (ii. 61),--he would be 63, the extension
having been effected as we learn from xiphilinus, by trajan a.d.
115. it is also reconcilable with agricola when consul offering to
him his daughter in marriage, he being then "a young man": "consul
egregiae tum spei filiam juveni mihi despondit" (agr. 9); for,
according as agricola was consul a.d. 76 or 77, he would be 24 or
25. but it is by no means reconcilable with the time when he
administered the several offices in the state. he tells us himself
that he "began holding office under vespasian, was promoted by
titus, and still further advanced by domitian": "dignitatem
nostram a vespasiano inchoatam, a tito auctam, a domitiano longius
provectam" (hist. i. 1). to have "held office" under vespasian he
must have been quaestor; to have been "promoted" by titus he must
have been aedile; and as for his further advancement we know that
he was praetor under domitian. by the lex villia annalis, passed
by the tribune lucius villius during the time of the republic in
573 after the building of the city, the years were fixed wherein
the different offices were to be entered on--in the language of
livy; "eo anno rogatio primum lata est ab lucio villio tribuno
plebis, quot annos nati quemque magistratum peterent caperentque"
(xl. 44); and the custom was never departed from, in conformity
with ovid's statement in his fasti with respect to the mature
years of those who legislated for his countrymen, and the special
enactment which strictly prescribed the age when romans could be
candidates for public offices:

    "jura dabat populo senior, finitaque certis
    legibus est aetas, unde petatur honos."
    fast. v. 65-6.

after the promulgation of his famous plebiscitum by the old
tribune of the people in the year 179 a.c., a roman could not fill
the office of quaestor till he was 31, nor aedile till he was 37,--as,
guided by the antiquaries, sigonius and pighius, doujat, the
delphin editor of livy, states: "quaestores ante annum aetatis
trigesimum primum non crearentur, nec aediles curules ante
septimum ac trigesimum";--and the ages for the two offices were
usually 32 and 38.

from vespasian's rule extending to ten years we cannot arrive at
the date when tacitus was quaestor; but we can guess when he was
aedile, as titus was emperor only from the spring of 79 to the
autumn of 81.

had his appointment to the aedileship taken place on the last day
of the reign of titus, he would then be but 29 years old; and
though in the time of the emperors, after the year 9 of our aera,
there might be a remission of one or more years by the lex julia
or the lex pappia poppaea, those laws enacted rewards and
privileges to encourage marriage and the begetting of children;
the remission could, therefore, be in favour only of married men,
especially those who had children; so that any such indulgence in
the competition for the place of honours could not have been
granted to tacitus, he not being, as will be immediately seen, yet
married. in order, then, that he should have been aedile under
titus,--even admitting that he could boast, like cicero, of having
obtained all his honours in the prescribed years--"omnes honores
anno suo"--and been aedile the moment he was qualified by age for
the office,--he must have been born, at least, as far back as the
year 44.

this will be reconcilable with all that pliny says, as well as
with his being married when "young"; for he would then be 32 or
33, and his bride 22 or 23; for the daughter of agricola was born
when her father was quaestor in asia--"sors quaesturae provinciam
asiam dedit ... auctus est ibi filia." (agr. 9). nor let it be
supposed that a roman would not have used the epithet "young" to a
man of 32 or 33, seeing that the romans applied the term to men in
their best years, from 20 to 40, or a little under or over. hence
livy terms alexander the great at the time of his death, when he
was 31, "a young man," "egregium ducem fuisse alexandrum ...
adolescens ... decessit" (ix. 17): so cicero styles lucius crassus
at the age of 34;--"talem vero exsistere eloquentiam qualis fuerit
in crasso et antonio ... alter non multum (quod quidem exstaret),
et id ipsum adolescens, alter nihil admodum scripti reliquisset".
(de orat. ii. 2): so also does cornelius nepos speak of marcus
brutus, when the latter was praetor, brutus being then 43 years of
age:--"sic marco bruto usus est, ut nullo ille adolescens aequali
familiarius" (att. 8); to this passage of nepos's, nicholas
courtin, his delphin editor, adds that the ancients called men
"young" from the age of 17 to the age of 46; notwithstanding that
varro limited youth to 30 years:--"a 17 ad 46 annum, adolescentia
antiquitus pertingebat, ut ab antiquis observatum est. nihilominus
varro ad 30 tantum pertingere ait." but tacitus being born in 44
is not reconcilable with his being the author of the annals, as
thus:--

some time in the nineteen years that trajan was emperor,--from 98
to ll7,--tacitus, being then between the ages of 54 and 73,
composed his history. he paused when he had carried it on to the
reign of domitian; the narrative had then extended to twenty-three
years, and was comprised in "thirty books," if we are to believe
st. jerome in his commentary on the fourteenth chapter of
zechariah:

"cornelius tacitus ... post augustum usque ad mortem domitiani
vitas caesarum triginta voluminibus exaravit." [endnote 013] it was
scarcely possible for tacitus to have executed his history in a
shorter compass;--indeed, it is surprising that the compass was so
short, looking at the probability of his having observed the
symmetry attended to by the ancients in their writings, and having
continued his work on the plan he pursued at the commencement, the
important fragment which we have of four books, and a part of the
fifth, embracing but little more than one year. whether he ever
carried into execution the design he had reserved for his old
age,--writing of nerva and trajan,--we have no record. but two
things seem tolerably certain; that he would have gone on with
that continuation to his history in preference to writing the
annals; and that he would not have written that continuation until
after the death of the emperor trajan. he would then have been 73.
now, how long would he have been on that separate history? then at
what age could he have commenced the annals? and how long would he
have been engaged in its composition? we see that he must have
been bordering on 80, if not 90: consequently with impaired
faculties, and thus altogether disqualified for producing such a
vigorous historical masterpiece; for though we have instances of
poets writing successfully at a very advanced age, as pindar
composing one of his grandest lyrics at 84, and sophocles his
oedipus coloneus at 90, we have no instance of any great
historian, except livy, attempting to write at a very old age, and
then livy rambled into inordinate diffuseness.

ii. the silence maintained with respect to the annals by all
writers till the first half of the fifteenth century is much more
striking than chronology in raising the very strongest suspicion
that tacitus did not write that book. this is the more remarkable
as after the first publication of the last portion of that work by
vindelinus of spire at venice in 1469 or 1470, all sorts and
degrees of writers began referring to or quoting the annals, and
have continued doing so to the present day with a frequency which
has given to its supposed writer as great a celebrity as any name
in antiquity. kings, princes, ministers and politicians have
studied it with diligence and curiosity, while scholars,
professors, authors and historians in italy, spain, france,
england, holland, germany, denmark and sweden have applied their
minds to it with an enthusiasm, which has been like a kind of
worship. yet, after the most minute investigation, it cannot be
discovered that a single reference was made to the annals by any
person from the time when tacitus lived until shortly before the
day when vindelinus of spire first ushered the last six books to
the admiring world from the mediaeval athens. when it appeared it
was at once pronounced to be the brightest gem among histories;
its author was greeted as a most wonderful man,--the "unique
historian", for so went the phrase--"inter historicos unicus."

now, are we to be asked quietly to believe that there never lived
from the first quarter of the second century till after the second
quarter of the fifteenth, a single individual possessed of
sufficient capacity to discern such eminent and obvious excellence
as is contained in the annals? are we to believe that that could
have been so? in a slowly revolving cycle of 1,000 years and more?
ay, upwards of 1,300! if that really was the case, it is enough to
strike us dumb with stupor in contemplating such a miraculous
instance of perpetuated inanity,--among the lettered, too!--the
learned! the studious! the critical! if that was not the case,
what a long neglect! anyhow, the silence is inexplicable. it
indicates one of two things,--duncelike stupidity or studious
contempt. both these surmises must be dismissed,--the first as too
absurd, the second as too improbable. there can arise a third
conjecture--taste for intellectual achievements, and appreciation
of literary merit, had vanished for awhile from the earth, to
return after an absence of forty generations of mankind. again,
this supposed probability is too preposterously extravagant to be
for an instant credited because it cannot for a moment be
comprehended. in short, how marvellous it is! how utterly
unaccountable! how inexpressibly mysterious!

pliny does not say a word about the annals. the earliest latin
father, tertullian, quotes only the history (apol. c. 16).
st. jerome, in his commentary on zechariah (iii. 14), cites the
passage in the fifth book of the history about the origin of the
jews; he also notices what tacitus says of another important
event, the fall of jerusalem, which, having occurred in the reign
of vespasian, must have been narrated in the history. the "single
book" treating of the caesars, which vopiscus says tacitus wrote,
must have been the "history," ten copies of which the emperor
tacitus ordered to be placed every year in the public libraries
among the national archives. (tac. imp. x.) orosius, the spanish
ecclesiastic, who flourished at the commencement of the fifth
century, has several references to tacitus in his famous work,
hormesta. this great proficient in knowledge of the scriptures and
disciple of st. augustin quotes the fifth book of the history
thrice (lib. v., cc. 5 and 10), and thrice alludes to facts
recorded by tacitus,--the temple of janus being open from the time
of augustus to vespasian (vii. 3);--the number of the jews who
perished at the siege of jerusalem (vii. 9); and the possibly
large number of romans who were killed in the wars with the daci
during the reign of domitian (vii. 10):--all which passages must
have been in the lost portions of the history.

in his epistles and poems, that man of wit and fancy, with an
intellect and learning above the fifth century in which he lived,
--sidonius apollinaris,--has one quotation from tacitus and three
references to him. the quotation, which occurs in the fourteenth
chapter of the fourth book of his epistles, is from the last
section of the history, (that part of the speech of civilis where
the seditious batavian touches on the friendship which existed
between himself and vespasian); and his three references are,
first, to the "ancient mode of narrative," combined with the
greatest "literary excellence" (iv. 22); secondly, to "genius for
eloquence" (carm. xxiii. 153-4); and thirdly, to "pomp of manner"
(carm. ii. 192); the not inelegant christian writer enumerating
qualities that specially commend themselves in the history. when
spartian praises tacitus for "good faith," the eulogy is more
appropriate to the writer of the history than the annals, howbeit
that so many moderns, including the famous philologist and
polygrapher, justus lipsius; the pomeranian scholar of the last
century, meierotto; boetticher and prutz all question the veracity
of tacitus; while for what he says of the jews tertullian
vituperates him in language so outrageous as to be altogether
unbecoming the capacious mind of the patristic worthy, who calls
him, "the most loquacious of liars,"--"mendaciorum loquacissimus;"
--in which strain of calumny he was, from the same cause of religious
fervour, followed centuries after,--in the seventeenth,--by two
of the most renowned preachers and orators of their day, the famous
jesuit, famianus strada, and his less known contemporary, but most
able chamberlain of urban viii., augustino mascardi,--as if all
these pious christians found it quite impossible to pardon a heathen,
blinded by the prejudices of paganism, for believing what he did
of the hebrews; and for recording which belief he ought to receive
immediate forgiveness, seeing that justin, plutarch, strabo and
democritus said as bad, if not worse things of that ancient people
and their sacred books. [endnote 019]

cassiodorus, the senator, is the only writer of the sixth century,
who makes any allusion to tacitus, and that but once, in the fifth
book of his epistles, to what the roman says in his germany of the
origin of amber, about which naturalists are still divided, that
it is a distillation from certain trees. freculphus (otherwise
written radulphus), bishop of lisieux, who died in the middle of
the ninth century (856), in the second volume of his chronicles,
--the sixth chapter of the second book,--quotes tacitus as the
author of the history, the passage being in reference to the
romans who fell in the dacian war. we have no proof that the
annals was in existence in the twelfth century from what john of
salisbury says in his polycraticon (viii. 18), that tacitus is
among the number of those historians, "qui tyrannorum atrocitates
et exitus miseros plenius scribunt;" for in his completed history
tacitus must have expatiated pretty freely on the "atrocious
tyranny" of domitian, and the "unfortunate termination of the
lives of tyrants."

from the time of john of salisbury till shortly before the
publication of the annals, no further reference is made to tacitus
by any writer or historian, monkish or otherwise, not even of
erudite germany, beginning with abbot hermannus, who wrote in the
twelfth century the history of his own monastery of st. martin's
at dornick, and ending with caspar bruschius, who, in the
sixteenth century, wrote an epitome of the archbishoprics and
bishoprics of germany, and the centuria prima (as daniel nessel in
the next century wrote the centuria secunda) of the german
monasteries. and yet in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
all kinds of writers quote the annals about as freely and
frequently as they quote the history, and that not once or twice,
but five or six, and even seven and eight times, in the same work.
it would be impossible to mention them all, the writers being "as
numerous as the leaves in vallambrosa's vale";--a figure that can
hardly be considered hyperbolic when the enormous number of these
writers can be partially guessed from the following catalogue of
those who delighted in antiquarian researches, whose productions
cited are archaeological, and who made all their references to the
annals for the purpose of merely illustrating archaic matters;
nevertheless, the number of such writers alone amounts to as many
as a score; moreover, the whole twenty are to be found in one
compilation comprised in but five volumes,--polenus's new
supplement to the collections of graevius and gronovius, entitled
"utriusque thesauri antiquitatum romanarum graecarumque nova
supplementa";--the friesland scholar, titus popma in his
"de operis servorum"; the italian antiquary, lorenzo pignorio,
canon of trevigo, in his treatise "de servis"; the renowned critic,
salmasius, in his explanation of two ancient inscriptions found on
a temple in the island of crete ("notae ad consecrationem templi
in agro herodis attici triopio"); peter burmann in his "de
vectigalibus"; albertinus barrisonus in his "de archivis"; merula,
the jurist, historian and polygrapher, in his "de legibus
romanorum"; carolus patinus in his commentary "in antiquum
monumentum marcellinae"; polletus in his "historia fori romani";
aegyptius in his "de bacchanalibus explicatio"; gisbert cuper in
his "monumenta antiqua inedita"; octavius ferrarius in his
"dissertatio de gladiatoribus"; william a loon in his
"eleutheria"; schaeffer in his "de re vehiculari"; johannes
jacobus claudius in his "diatribe de nutricibus et paedagogis";
antonius bombardinus in his "de carcere tractatus"; gutherlethus
in his work on the "salii," or priests of mars; the learned
spaniard, miniana, in his "de theatro saguntino dialogus"; gorius
in his "columbarium libertorum et servorum"; spon in his
"miscellanea erudita antiquitatis" and jaques leroy in his
"achates tiberianus." in fact, the annals of tacitus is noticed,
or quoted, or referred to, or commented upon at length (as at the
commencement of the sixteenth century by scipione ammirato), in an
endless list of works, with or without the names of the authors,
which by itself is all but conclusive that the annals was not in
existence till the fifteenth century, and not generally known till
the sixteenth and seventeenth.

but to return for a moment to what was done by two writers, who
lived before the fifteenth century,--sulpicius severus, who died
a.d. 420; and jornandez, who, in the time of justinian, was
secretary to the gothic kings in italy. now, it must not be
withheld,--for it would be too uncandid,--that identical passages
are found in the annals ascribed to tacitus and the sacred history
of sulpicius severus.

in order that the reader may see the identity of the passages, we
place them in juxtaposition, italicising the words that are found
in both works:--

sulpicius (ii. 28). "_inditum imperatori flammeum, dos et
genialis torus et faces nuptiales; cuncta denique, quae_ vel
_in feminis_ non sine verecundia conspiciuntur,
_spectata_."

annals (xv. 37). "_inditum imperatori flammeum_, visi
auspices, _dos et genialis torus et faces nuptiales; cuncta
denique spectata, quae_ etiam _in femina_ nox operit."

sulpicius (ii. 29). "sed opinio omnium invidiam incendii in
principem retorquebat, _credebaturque imperator gloriam
innovandae urbis quaesisse_."

annals (xv. 10). "_videbaturque nero condendae urbis novae_
et cognomento suo adpellandae _gloriam quaerere_."

sulpicius (v. 2). "quin et novae mortes excogitatae, _ut ferarum
tergis contecti laniatu canum interirent_. multi _crucibus
affixi, aut flamma usti_. plerique in id reservati, ut, cum
_defecisset dies, in usum nocturni luminis urerentur_."

annals (xv. 44). "et pereuntibus addita ludibria, _ut ferarum
tergis contecti, laniatu canum interirent_, aut _crucibus
affixi, aut flammandi_, atque, ubi _defecisset dies, in usum
nocturni luminis urerentur_."

these passages, of course, have, till this moment, been regarded
as taken by sulpicius severus from the annals, on the unquestioned
assumption that that work was the composition of tacitus. the
passages, however, were taken from the historia sacra: they bear
traces of having been so appropriated, from sulpicius severus
composing with a harmony almost equal to tacitus, and a
grammatical correctness on a par with the roman, while the author
of the annals mars that harmony, here by the change of a word, and
there by the reconstruction of a sentence; and the grammatical
correctness by substituting for "cum," which strictly signifies
"when," "ubi," which strictly signifies "where": hence, from
resembling tacitus less than sulpicius severus, he seems, of two
writers convicted of plagiarism, to be the one who purloined the
passages from the other; and if he introduced but trifling
alterations, it was because the accomplished presbyter of the
fifth century was the master of a neat latin style, which will
bear comparison with that of the best classical writers. indeed,
sulpicius severus is likened for style and eloquence to sallust;
he is known as the "christian sallust"; and leclerc in the
twentieth volume of his bibliotheque choisie, is loud in praise of
his latin, which is, certainly, purer than could have been
imagined for his time. he was, nevertheless the very last
authority that the author of the annals ought to have followed for
authentic particulars with respect to nero; for as that emperor
was the first persecutor of the christians, there was nothing too
bad that the church-building ecclesiastical writer did not think
it right to state of him, as (in his own language) "the worst, not
only of princes, but of all mankind, and even brute beasts"; he
went, in fact, to the extreme length of believing, being a
ridiculously credulous chiliast, that nero would live again as
anti-christ in the millennian kingdom before the end of the world.

it is generally supposed that jornandez,--whose works are so
valuable for their history of the fifth and sixth centuries of our
aera,--when speaking, in the second chapter of his history of the
goths, of one "cornelius as the author of annals," is speaking of
tacitus,--"cornelius etiam annalium scriptor." camden in his
britannia questions whether tacitus is meant by "cornelius"; and,
certainly the passage quoted, which is about meneg in cornwall, is
nowhere to be found in any of the works written by the ancient
roman. but if tacitus be meant, the passage is an interpolation,
because the historical books ascribed to tacitus bear in all the
mss. either the title "augustae historiae libri," or "ab excessu
divi augusti historiarum libri," and so in all the first published
editions--that of vindelinus of spire about 1470, of puteolanus
and lanterius about 1475, of beroaldus in 1515, and the early
editions of venice 1484, 1497 and 1512; of rome in 1485; milan
1517; basle 1519, and florence (the juntine edition) 1527--it not
being till 1533, that beatus rhenanus first gave those books the
name "annals" (it being justus lipsius who, close at the
commencement of the last quarter of that century,--in 1574,--first
divided the books into two parts, to one of which he gave the name
"annals," and to the other, "histories"). then how could
jornandez, who lived in the sixth century, have known any writings
of tacitus by the name of "annals," when that title was not given
to them until the sixteenth century?

we may now, after close research, advance this with extreme
caution, and certainty:--no support can be derived from citations
or statements made by any writer till the fifteenth century that
tacitus wrote a number of books of the annals. should any one
extensively read known authors, living between the second and the
fifteenth century, besides those mentioned, who quote tacitus, it
will be found that their quotations are from the history, the
germany, or the agricola; and this can be predicted with just as
much confidence, as an astronomer predicts eclipses of the sun and
the moon, and, for their verification, needs not wait to see the
actual obscuration of those heavenly bodies.

iii. in turning to the different mss., we find that the age of all
of them confirms in an equally corroborative manner the theory
that tacitus did not write the annals. here let it be noted that
the age of a ms. can easily be discovered; and that, too, in a
variety of ways:--by the formation of the characters, such as the
roundness of the letters; or their largeness or smallness;--the
writing of the final l's; the use of the gothic s's and the gothic
j's; the dotting, or no dotting of the i's; the absence or
presence of diphthongs; the length of the lines; the punctuation;
the accentuation; the form or size; the parchment or the paper;
the ink;--or some other mode of detection. those mss. need only be
examined which contain either the whole or the concluding books of
the annals.

of the seven mss. in the vatican, that numbered 1,864, (referred
to by john frederic gronovius, and other editors of tacitus as the
"farnesian," from its having been transferred from the farnese
palace to the vatican,) is supposed to be the oldest, for it is
believed to be of the fourteenth century; but the vellum on which
it is written is of the sixteenth; so is the vellum of no. 1,422.
no. 1,863 was thought by justus lipsius to be almost as old as no.
1,864, to have been of the close of the fourteenth century; but it
is written on vellum of the middle of the fifteenth century.
nothing can be ascertained, either from its form or the substance
on which it is written, of no. 2,965, but the bipontine editors
declared its date to be 1449. no. 1,958, which puteolanus used in
1475, for his edition (containing the concluding books of the
annals) was copied at genoa in the year 1448. the two others,
numbered 412 and 1,478, are both written on vellum of the
fifteenth century.

the oldest paris ms. is in the bibliotheque nationale, and is
written on paper of the close of the fifteenth century. nobody
knows what has become of the ms., which is supposed to have been
anterior to the editions at the end of the fifteenth century, and
was in the library of the congregation de l'oratoire, to whom it
was presented by henri harlai de sancy, who brought it from italy
and died in the oratory in 1667.

the ms. of wolfenbuttel (guelferbytana), used by ernesti in his
edition, was bought at ferrara on the 28th of september, 1461;
beyond that nothing is known of it. the ms. in the library of
jesus college, oxford, is of the year 1458; the bodleian, numbered
2,764, is of the century after, though the great benedictine
antiquary, montfaucon, in that monument of labour and erudition,
bibliotheca bibliothecarum mss. nova, is of opinion that it is as
old as 1463; and that in the harleian collection of mss. in the
british museum, also numbered 2,764, stated to date back to 1412,
can scarcely be older than 1440 or 1450, from the diphthongal
writing, first introduced by guarino of verona, who died in 1460.
the ms. of grenoble, written on very fine vellum, and containing
the whole of the annals, is of the sixteenth century. the three
medicean, the neapolitan and the other italian mss. are all of
very modern writing. as to the mss. of wurzburg and mirandola, the
former is not to be found, and the latter was not in existence
even in the time of justus lipsius.

the four most important mss. are those known as the first and
second florence, the buda and that from which vindelinus of spire
published the last six books. the two oldest are the "second
florence" and the "buda." it would seem that the "second
florence", from the note at the end, dates back to the year 395,
though the benedictines in their nouveau traite de diplomatique
(vol. iii. pp. 278-9) thought they recognized in it a lombard
writing of the tenth or eleventh century; ernesti modified that to
the ninth; others again changed it to the seventh and even the
sixth; but it will be shown to satisfaction in the course of this
treatise that it belongs to the fifteenth century. so the buda
ms., believed by justus lipsius to be as ancient as the second
florence (which he thought with the benedictines was of the tenth
or eleventh century) was considered by james gronovius to be very
modern; and very modern it is, being traceable to a little after
the same period as the second florence, namely, the fifteenth
century. the first florence, which was stated to have been found
in the abbey of corvey, and which furnished the opening six books
of the annals as first given to the world by beroaldus, is of an
age that has hitherto never been determined; but that age will be
shown, towards the close of this work, to be the first quarter of
the sixteenth century. the ms. from which vindelinus of spire
published his edition, was in the library of st mark's, venice,
but,--according, to croll and exter,--it is no longer to be found.

the case, then, stands thus with respect to the mss.;--no ms. of
the works of tacitus, whose existence can be traced back further
than the sixteenth century, contains the whole of the annals; and
no ms. of the works of tacitus, whose existence can be traced back
further than the first half of the preceding century, has the
closing books of the annals.

here let me briefly recapitulate;--it being very important for the
reader to bear in mind that three things have now been shown:--
first, that, from the chronological point of view, tacitus could
barely have written the annals; secondly, that, from the silence
preserved about that book by all writers for upwards of 1300 years
from the death of tacitus, there is cause for supposing it was not
in existence from his time, that is, the second century to the
fifteenth and sixteenth (the commencement of the fifteenth century
being the time of the forgery of the last six books, and the
commencement of the sixteenth the time of the publication of the
forged first six books);--and thirdly, that there is nothing to
contradict this theory of mine in the age of any of the known mss.
containing a part, or the whole of the annals; but, on the
contrary, to verify it, from the age of the oldest being limited
to the fifteenth century; and that if there be, or ever have been
others older, it is singular, and puzzling to account for, that
one of two things should have occurred; either that they are lost,
or else that their age cannot be determined,--both which latter
things are actually the case with respect to the two mss. from
which the annals was originally printed,--that which supplied the
concluding books being lost, and that which contains the whole of
it being of an age that nobody up till now has been able to
determine.




chapter ii.

a few reasons for believing the annals to be a forgery.


i. the fifteenth century an age of imposture, shown in the
invention of printing.--ii. the curious discovery of the first six
books of the annals.--iii. the blunders it has in common with all
forged documents.--iv. the twelve tables.--v. the speech of
claudius in the eleventh book of the annals.--vi. brutus creating
the second class of nobility.--vii. camillus and his grandson.--
viii. the marching of germanicus.--ix. description of london in
the time of nero.--x. labeo antistius and capito ateius; the
number of people executed for their attachment to sejanus; and the
marriage of drusus, the brother of tiberius, to the elder antonia.

i. i have now so far cleared the way as to be in a fair position
to enter with feasibleness into an investigation of the annals,
with the view of proving that it was not written by tacitus.

in beginning the investigation, i shall proceed on the assumption
that it is a modern forgery of the fifteenth century, having as
grounds for this assumption that it was the age when the original
mss. containing the work were discovered; that the existence of
those mss. cannot be traced farther than that century; that (which
is of vast consequence in an inquiry of this description) it was
an age of imposture; of credulity so immoderate that people were
easily imposed upon, believing, as they did, without sufficient
evidence, or on slight evidence, or no evidence at all, whatever
was foisted upon them; when, too, the love of lucre was such that
for money men willingly forewent the reputation that is the
accompaniment of the grandest achievements of the intellect. take,
for example, the noble art of printing; for inventing it any man
of genius might reasonably be proud. his name, if known, would be
emblazoned on the scroll of imperishable fame; be displayed for
ever on the highest pyramid of mind; and his country would receive
an additional beam of splendor to its previous blaze of renown.
but who, for a certainty, knows the inventor of printing? or the
country of its origin? was it holland in the person of coster of
haarlem? or germany in the person of mentel, the nobleman, of
strasburg? or guttenberg, the goldsmith, of mayence? was it
neither of these countries? or none of these men? and why this
uncertainty? because a few men possessing the secret, which they
kept cautiously to themselves, of printing by means of movable
blocks of wood, preferred accumulating enormous sums, equivalent
to fair fortunes, by receiving five, six and even between seven
and eight hundred gold sequins from a king of france or a pope of
rome, a cardinal or an archbishop, for a bible, which, printed,
was passed off as written. we all know how the whole imposture
exploded, by the king of france and the archbishop of paris
comparing the bibles which they had bought of faust during his
stay at the soleil d'or in the rue st. jacques, paris. each
thought his bible so superb that the whole world could not produce
such another for beauty,--the books being fine vellum copies of
what are now known as the mazarin bible;--and what was their
amazement on discovering, after a very close comparison, that
everything was exactly alike in the two copies,--the flower-pieces
in gold, green and blue, with grouped and single birds amid
tendrils and leaves, the illuminated letters at the beginning of
books with variegated embellishments and brilliant hues of scarlet
and azure, the crimson initials to each chapter and sentence,
along with astonishing and incomprehensible conformity in letters,
words, pagination and lines on every page.

ii. the temptation was great to palm off literary forgeries,
especially of the chief writers of antiquity, on account of the
popes, in their efforts to revive learning, giving money rewards
and indulgences to those who should procure ms. copies of any of
the ancient greek or roman authors. manuscripts turned up, as if
by magic, in every direction; from libraries of monasteries,
obscure as well as famous; from the most out-of-the-way places,--
the bottom of exhausted wells, besmeared by snails, as the history
of velleius paterculus; or from garrets, where they had been
contending with cobwebs and dust, as the poems of catullus. so
long as the work had an appearance of high antiquity, it passed
muster as an old classic; and no doubt could be entertained of its
genuineness, if, in addition to its ancient look, it was brought
in a fragmentary form. we have no history of the last six
fragmentary books of the annals--at least, up to this time; though
i shall give it towards the end of this inquiry; but we are told
all about the discovery of the fragmentary first six books by
meibomius, the westphalian historian, and professor of poetry and
history at helmstaedt at the close of the sixteenth century in his
opuscula historica rerum germianicarum, while telling the story of
the life of witikind, the monk of the abbey of corvey; by justus
lipsius in note 34 to the second book of the annals; by brotier,
and other editors of tacitus.

john de medici, that magnificent pope, had been scarcely elected
to the pontifical chair by the title of leo x. in the spring of
1513, when he caused it to be publicly made known that he would
increase the price of rewards given by his predecessors to persons
who procured new ms. copies of ancient greek and roman works. more
than a year, nearly two years elapsed; then his own "thesaurum
quaestor pontificius"--"steward," "receiver," or "collector",--
angelo arcomboldi, brought to him a new ms. of the works of
tacitus, with a most startling novelty--the first six (or, as then
divided, five) books of the annals! everybody was amazed; and
everybody was extremely anxious to know where and how it had been
obtained. the story of arcomboldi was that he had found the
stranger among the treasures on the well-stored shelves in the
library of the benedictine monastery on the banks of the weser, at
corvey, in westphalia, long famed for the high culture of its
learned inmates. the ms. was given out as being of great
antiquity, traceable to, at the very least, the commencement of
the ninth century; for it was said to have belonged to one of the
most distinguished and accomplished scholars of the abbey,
anschaire, whom gregory iv. in the year 835 appointed his legate
apostolic in denmark and sweden, and who christianized the whole
northern parts of europe. the ms. was conned with care: it was
musty, discoloured and antique-looking; furthermore, it was of the
usual orthodox nature of recovered ancient mss.--it was
fragmentary: the genius of tacitus was believed to be detected in
the newly found books: 500 gold sequins were counted out from the
papal treasury to the greedy discoverer: at the expense of leo,
the scholastic philippo beroaldi the younger, who was professor of
the learned languages in the university of rome, and who wrote
latin lyric poetry (in the opinion of paulus jovius) with the
elegance and correctness of horace, superintended the text; the
celebrated stephen guilleret came all the way from lorraine to
print it; and the "historiarum libri quinque nuper in germania
inventi" were ushered forth to the world in rome _literis
rotundis_ on the first day of march, 1515. from that day to
this the imposture has slumbered; the counterfeit coin has passed
current, nobody having noticed the absence of the true ring of the
genuine metal.

iii. the books of the annals must not merely be assumed to be
forgeries; they must be proved to be so; for, if forgeries, they
cannot be as invulnerable as walls of adamant. it is nothing that
nobody has suspected they were forged;--nothing that the editors
and commentators, who, for the most part possessed of remarkable
perspicacity and discernment, have applied their minds to minute
revision and close examination of these books, have, after such
diligent attention never considered them to be spurious, but
belonging to the domain of true history;--nothing that they have
stood for close on four hundred years unchallenged, deceiving the
wisest and the most learned as well as the best and the most
experienced in matters of this description. the cause is obvious:
the forger fabricated with the decided determination of defying
detection. he did not rely upon his own sagacity alone: he called
in the assistance of two of his cleverest friends: three of the
astutest men in the most enlightened portion then of europe,--
italy,--sat in conclave over the matter for nearly three years,
deliberating in every possible way how to avoid suspicious
management and faulty performance: consequently, the forgery is
anything but plain and palpable; nay, it is wonderfully obscure
and monstrously difficult: nevertheless, like all forged
documents, it is bungled--ay, in spite of the pains taken to keep
free from bad and blundering work, it is, occasionally (as will be
seen in the present book, from this point until the close),
clumsily, awkwardly, grossly, ridiculously bungled.

in the last generation there was a famous trial for forgery in
edinburgh. a number of documents, thirty-three, were impounded as
forged to obtain for the forger the title of a scotch earl and
domains covering many millions of acres,--a larger area of square
miles than were included in the whole united territories of the
now dethroned dukes of tuscany, parma and modena, or all the
possessions put together of the german electors, margraves and
landgraves. in such a number of legal documents executed by one
man, and that man, too, a civilian, it was almost next to an
impossibility that there should not be a good deal of bungling.
one of the blunders was the king of scotland giving away lands and
provinces that never belonged to scotland, for they were lands and
provinces in new england; another was the name of archbishop
spottiswoode as witness to a document executed by king james i. at
whitehall on the 7th of december, 1639, whereas archbishop
spottiswoode had been dead eleven days, his monument in
westminster abbey bearing as the date of his death, the 26th of
november in that year. so the author of the annals, who, as will
be hereafter shown, lived in the fifteenth century, could not
possibly write many books of ancient roman history without, every
now and then doing or saying something that was attended with
dreadful fatality to his fraud; for he could not write them
without palpable blunders; and some are so clumsy as to surpass
conception what bungling can do.

iv. he makes tacitus commit an error about the contents of the
twelve tables, which is really as monstrous as if we could fancy
ourselves reading in the pages of a native historian of mark,
hume, henry, or lingard, some blunder, into which a schoolboy
could not fall, about the contents of magna charta, the bill of
rights, the declaration of rights, or any other well known english
law, on which the constitution of the country is primarily
founded. in a work given out as written by tacitus we are told
that the twelve tables first fixed interest for usury at an
"uncia," or twelfth part of an as per hundred asses per month, or
one per cent per annum:--"primo duodecim tabulis sanctum 'ne quis
unciario foenore amplius exerceret,' cum antea ex libidine
locupletium agitaretur" (an. vi. 16). into this error the author
of the annals must surely have been seduced by some shocking
mediaeval writer of ancient roman history or antiquities, under
whose guidance he again falls into another mistake when ascribing
to tribunitian regulations the reduction of the interest to one-half
per cent. per annum, or the sixth part of an as per hundred
asses a month:--"dein rogatione tribuncia ad semuncias redacta"
(l. c.). the truth is that, in the year of rome 398, a hundred and
four years after the twelve tables were composed,--the tribunes
duillius and moenius passed the original law of interest at one
per cent: twelve years after,--in the year 410,--the interest was
reduced to one half per cent. under the consulate of lucius
manlius torquatus and caius plautius;--as may be seen by referring
to the seventh book (16, 27) of livy,--or still better, the clear
exposition of this error by montesquieu in the 22nd chapter of the
22nd book of his "esprit des loix." the author of the annals is
then only right when stating that originally the interest was one
per cent. per annum, and afterwards reduced to half that amount.
in everything else he blunders to an extent that is inexplicable
in an ancient roman. were any staunch upholder of the authenticity
of the annals to be here called upon compulsorily to give a
reason, unprepared or premeditated, plausible or probable, why,
after this exposure of such an error, he still believed it
possible that the blunder could have been made by tacitus, who
achieved a brilliant reputation as an historian writing truthfully
of his countrymen, as a lawyer practising successfully among them,
as a statesman filling with ability exalted offices, and thus
possessed such pledges for being admirably informed and
exceedingly cautious, he would be reluctantly forced to take
refuge in the quibbling of shakespeare's sir john falstaff:
--"i would not tell you on compulsion. give you a reason on
compulsion! if reasons were as plenty as blackberries, i would
give no man a reason on compulsion, i!"

the twelve tables are most fatal for the author of the annals;
they bring out his imposture so clearly to the broad glare of
noonday. tacitus is made to place on record for the enlightenment
of posterity that, after those tables were composed, his
countrymen ceased making just and equal laws, only occasionally
penal enactments; but more frequently, on account of the
differences between the two orders, decrees for attaining
illegitimate honours and for banishing distinguished citizens,
along with other sinister legislation:--"compositae duodecim
tabulae, finis aequi juris; nam secutae leges, etsi aliquando in
maleficos ex delicto, saepius tamen dissensione ordinum, et
apiscendi illicitos honores, aut pellendi claros viros, aliaque ob
prava, per vim latae sunt" (iii. 27). the statement is about as
contrary to fact as if an english historian were to assert that
after charles i. assented to the petition of rights, there was an
end to all further enlargement in this country of the rights,
liberties and privileges of the subject,--the only laws passed
since then being for the repression of crime, the mitigation of
the penal code, and the establishment of religious equality;
because if we set aside all the laws that were passed by the
romans for the bettering of their state after the year 449 before
our aera,--which is the date of the composition of the twelve
tables,--and look only at those which extended social equality, we
find enactments "aequi juris," such as the lex canuleia which
allowed the intermarriage of patricians and plebeians, and the
leges liciniae, which put both orders on a par in holding public
offices. it is clear that these laws never came to the knowledge
of the author of the annals; and it is for the reader to decide
for himself whether he thinks it likely that a lawyer and
statesman of the stamp of tacitus could have been ignorant of the
removal of these weighty and vexatious class inconveniences.

v. had tacitus written the annals, he would have known more of the
speech which claudius spake in the senate (xi. 24), when the
inhabitants of transalpine gaul petitioned to be rendered eligible
to the highest offices of the state, than to direct the eloquence
of the emperor in favour of all the extra-provincial gauls in
general, and the aedui in particular. from the way in which he
wrote harangues--that of galgacus in his agricola, for instance,
--he would have caught in his alembic the essence of the original,
and sublimated it; but he would not have placed before us an
offspring that does not reflect one feature of its parent. yet
that is what the author of the annals did with the speech of
claudius: he fabricated that which bears not the faintest
resemblance to the original. if the assumption be considered as
true that he forged the annals, he could not have done otherwise;
for when he was engaged in the business of forgery, the speech was
not in existence, it not being until 1528, more than a hundred
years after the eleventh book of the annals was written by him,
and considerably over half a century after it was first printed in
venice, that a copy of the speech of the emperor claudius, which
had long been lost, was found again buried within the earth at
lyons, and as so discovered is still preserved, engraved on two
brass plates in the vestibule of the town hall of lyons, a lasting
memento of the modern fabrication of the annals.

vi. the author of the annals ascribes to brutus the creation of
the second class of nobility, which brutus no more created than
(as famianus strada observes,) "pythagoras originated the idea of
the transmigration of souls." the statement that "few were left of
the families to which romulus gave the title, the 'gentes
majores,' or 'old clans,' and lucius brutus the 'gentes minores,'
or 'young clans'":--"paucis jam reliquis familiarum, quas romulus
'majorum,' et lucius brutus 'minorum gentium' adpellaverant"
(xi.25):--could never have been written by a roman; because, in the
first place, it was not romulus who created the whole patrician
body known as the "majores gentes"; the only senators whom he
created were the "decuriones," or heads of the various "gentes" of
the united romans and sabines; to these tullus hostilius added the
most distinguished citizens of the albans, when they were removed
to rome in his reign;--and it was the united descendants of these
two sets of patricians who were called by subsequent generations
"patricii majorum gentium": in the second place, it was tarquinius
priscus who enlarged the patrician body by creating the 100
representatives of the luceres, or etruscans, senators, and it was
the descendants of these who were "called," by way of distinction
from the others, "patricii minorum gentium." the new sort of
nobility which originated with brutus was a very different kind of
thing: the new eminence or dignity conferred on the senators
elected by brutus was confined to themselves only, being strictly
personal and purely titular: until then roman senators had been
styled simply "patres," but from that time downwards they were
denominated "patres conscripti." no roman could have been ignorant
of this; and if the author of the annals did not know it, we ought
not to be too severe upon him, when we shall see afterwards that
he was a florentine of the fifteenth century: then on account of
his having lived so many centuries after the events of which he
writes, it is quite excusable that he should fall into a state of
confusion with respect to this rather out of the way matter,
though into such a state of confusion no roman could have fallen
on account of his intimate acquaintance with the outlines of his
constitution, the customs of his country, and the distinctions of
rank in native society.

vii. the author of the annals takes the grandson of the great
dictator camillus to have been his son, when he observes: "after
the illustrious recoverer of the city" (meaning rome) "and his son
camillus": "post illum reciperatorem urbis, filiumque ejus
camillum," (ii. 52). in that case what becomes of the exclamation
of spartian in his life of the emperor severus, when speaking of
great romans who had no illustrious children: "what of camillus?
for had he children like himself?" "quid camillus? nam sui similes
liberos habuit?" why, certainly, "he had children like himself,"
if marcus furius had been his son, and not his grandson; for he
was consul and dictator like the renowned and noble-minded lucius
furius. the mistake is easily accounted for in a modern european
writing roman history from the famous marcus furius camillus being
consul only eleven years after his grandfather, which makes it
look as if it was the son who succeeded, and not the grandson. but
it cannot be explained in a roman, who must have taken so much
pride in the second romulus of his country as to have known all
about his family relations. the error is only comparable to the
extreme case of an englishman being supposed to take such very
little interest in queen victoria as to mistake her for a daughter
of william iv.

viii. to be called upon to believe that these blunders could have
been committed by tacitus, is to ask one to believe that he, who
made no such mistakes in his history, ceased to write like a roman
when composing the annals. it is truly writing, not like an
ancient roman, but a modern european, when in the first book of
the annals germanicus is represented consulting whether he will
take a short and well known road, or one untried and difficult,
though the reason is, that by going the longer, he would go the
unguarded way, and really do things quicker: "consultatque, ex
duobus itineribus breve et solitum sequatur, an impeditius et
intentatum, eoque hostibus incautum. delecta longiore via, cetera
adcelerantur" (i. 50). were it not for this passage, one would
have thought that, in the days of tiberius, germany was almost as
bare of roads as the present interior of arabia and chinese
tartary; and that each tribe in that enormous wilderness of wood
and morass was approached, as the present people of dahomey,
ashantee and timbucto, by a single path; and that it was only,
after the lapse of centuries, when, in the due course of things,
germany had assumed a more civilised character, that there were
two, three, or more roads; so that we can quite understand it
being said of the bavarian general, john de werth, in the
seventeenth century, that he did this,--march out of the direct
way, which was watched, by another road, which was longer because
it was unguarded: thus pouncing on the enemy by night, and taking
them so by surprise that they fled in alarm, he gained a bloodless
victory, without the drawing of a sword from its scabbard. any
advantage that a modern general would gain in this way was not
open to an ancient general, particularly when invading the country
of a people like the germans, mere savages, who knew no more of
such arts of warfare, as guarding roads and sending out scouts,
than red indians, maoris and hottentots of the present time. sir
garnet wolseley, making his way to coomassie, as a crow would fly,
is just about the manner in which we may be sure that germanicus
made his way into germany--as straight as he could go. but
military history is not the forte of the author of the annals. he
knew it and avoided it as much as he could,--very unlike tacitus,
who, practically acquainted with military as well as civil
affairs, writes with an obvious liking, of combats and civil wars,
and, according to military authorities competent to pass an
opinion, shows everywhere familiarity with battles, marches,
management of armies and conduct of generals.

one cannot understand how tacitus, whose youth was passed in a
camp, should not have known the whole minutiae about the roman
army; and that he should, with respect to its ensigns, exhibit
extraordinary ignorance. the fact stood thus:--the legions had
"signa," or standards; the "socii," or allies, that is, the
latins, had "vexilla," or flags; so, perhaps, had the romans when
marching under arms to a new settlement, or "colony"; but,
certainly, soldiers raised in the provinces had no ensigns at all,
neither standards nor flags; yet in the first book of the annals
we hear of some "maniples," or "infantry companies" of the legions
that had been raised in pannonia, when the news reached them of
the breaking out of a mutiny in the camp, tearing to pieces their
_flags_: "manipuli ... postquam turbatum in castris accepere,
_vexilla_ convellunt" (i. 20). the mistake is similar to that
which would be made if any one among ourselves were to give
colours to our volunteers or standards to our yeomanry.

here it may be noticed that the figures of speech of tacitus are,
like those of most ancient romans, chiefly military. to be of the
highest rank is, with him, "to lead the van,"--"primum pilum
ducere" (hist. iv. 3), or to set about a thing, "to be girt" (as
with a sword),--"accingi" (hist. iv. 79). the author of the
annals, though borrowing the latter phrase, goes anywhere but to
the field of battle for his figures; he takes them mostly from the
ways of ordinary civil life, selecting his metaphors, now from the
trader's shop or the merchant's counting-house, as "ratio constat"
(an. i. 6), used when the debtor and creditor sides of an account
balance one another; now from seamen steering and tacking vessels,
or coachmen driving horses, as "verbis moderans" (an. vi. 2),
which nipperdey says ought to be rendered, "touching-up and
reining-in his words, and driving only at this."

ix. when julius caesar came to this country, he found the britons,
without an exception, thorough barbarians, the best of them living
in places that were fortified woods. the author of the annals,
only a century after this wild state of things in the barbarism of
the inhabitants and the rudeness of their abodes, speaks of
london, in the reign of nero, in the year 60, as if it were the
chief residence of merchants and their principal mart of trade in
the civilized world. if there be one thing certain, it is that
centuries after,--in the middle of the fourth,--the people of
london were only exporters of corn;--no certainty that they
carried on any other kind of commerce, except it might be doing a
little business in dogs, and slaves whom they captured from
neighbouring barbarians,--their imports being polished bits of
bone, toys and horse-collars. progressing, rapidly under the
romans, saxons, danes, normans, and in the time of the
plantagenets, they were in the fifteenth century a great and
wealthy people, illustrious for their commercial transactions,
dealing in every species of commodity, visited by merchants from
every part of europe, and envied by the most flourishing
communities, such as the trading oligarchies of italy. any one
living at that time,--especially in italy (where many
circumstances induce me to believe that the author or forger of
the "annals of tacitus" lived),--and hearing a great deal of the
wealth, greatness and immense antiquity of london, might easily
fall into this mistake, grievous in its enormity as it is. but any
one living about the time of nero, as tacitus did, could never
have described london in this flourishing state of commercial
greatness and prosperity. the chances are he never would have
heard of london; for that would be supposing in a roman at the
close of the first or the commencement of the second century of
our aera a geographical knowledge more minute than that of the
president of the royal geographical society, unless at the
haphazard mention of any particular village in the newly annexed
fiji islands, sir henry rawlinson could enter into a correct
account of its chief characteristic. but if we are to go to the
extreme length of supposing that tacitus had heard of london, he
would know that it was a place of no repute, utterly insignificant,
far inferior in importance to two now almost forgotten places in
essex and hertfordshire,--maldon and st. alban's,--called then
respectively camelodunum and verulamium,--the former being a
"colonia," and the latter a "municipium,"--london being a mere
"praefectura." it is then the height of absurdity to believe that
if tacitus wrote the annals we should have heard in that work london
spoken of as "remarkably celebrated for the multiplicity of its
merchants and its commodities": "copia negotiatorum et commeatuum
maxime celebre" (xiv. 33).

x. the author of the annals pretends to know more about prominent
individuals in rome than was known to their distinguished
contemporaneous countrymen. he writes of labeo antistius, as if
that jurisconsult were an example to the age in which he lived of
all the virtues and all goodness, and possessed, to a masterly
extent, accomplishments and acquirements; for thus he speaks of
him in conjunction with capito ateius: "capito ateius ...
principem in civitate locum studiis adsecutus--labeonem antistium,
iisdem artibus praecellentem ... namque illa aetas duo pacis
decora simul tulit; sed labeo incorrupta libertate ...
celebratior" (an. iii. 75). horace, who was a contemporary of
labeo's, says that he was a maniac, or, at any rate--"considered
very crazy in the company of the sane":--

    "labeone insanior inter
    sanos dicatur." (sat. i. iii. 82.)


hitherto horace by the side of "tacitus" has been no better than a
clay pitcher by a porcelain vase; thus his disparaging, but,
doubtless, quite correct estimate of labeo has been till now
altogether disregarded, in consequence of this passage in the
annals, from its author being credited with having exceeded what
the ancient romans had left us in the way of history.

so great is the repute of the author of the annals for supremacy
in the historian's art that justus lipsius places no faith
whatever in suetonius when that, possibly, most veracious
historian records in his life of tiberius (61) the number of the
people who were executed for their attachment to sejanus as
amounting to twenty; the universally applauded, and, generally
considered, most judicious batavian critic of the sixteenth
century, without a manuscript or edition for his authority, alters
this number for one thousand, because the author of the annals
speaks of a "countless" mass of slain of all ranks, ages, and both
(he says "all") sexes, and further describes corpses as lying
about singly or piled up in heaps: "jacuit _immensa_ strages,
omnis sexus, omnis aetas, illustres, ignobiles, dispersi aut
aggerati" (vi. 19).

hence, too, dr. nipperdey, in drawing up a table of the augustan
family, in order to guard the reader against being perplexed by
the relationships of that house, treats the same suetonius as of
no account when he says,--and suetonius twice says it (cal. i.,
ner. 5),--that drusus, the brother of tiberius, married "the
younger antonia." "in default of other evidence on the question of
fact," says the learned professor, "we must follow the better
author, tacitus,"--the better author being the writer of the
annals, who, on two occasions (i. 42; xii. 64), makes the "elder
antonia" the wife of drusus.

examples of this description could be multiplied. but it is not
necessary to pursue this line of argument farther,--at least, at
present. what is required just now is not so much proof that the
author of the annals did not write like the romans, but that he
did not write like tacitus, notwithstanding the strenuous efforts
he made to imitate him, and be mistaken for him by contemporaries
and posterity. to do this i must bring forward from the history
and the annals an accumulation of coincidences, seeing that the
fabricator, being a most acute person, must have proceeded upon
the same principle as a man who forges a cheque upon a banker, and
who, in the prosecution of his design, endeavours to imitate, as
closely as he can, the handwriting of his victim, and do
everything carefully enough to escape immediate detection,
whatever may afterwards ensue.




chapter iii.

suspicious character of the annals from the point of treatment.


i. nature of the history.--ii. arrangement of the narrative.--
iii. completeness in form.--iv. incongruities, contradictions and
disagreements from the history of tacitus.--v. craftiness of the
writer.--vi. subordination of history to biography.--vii. the
author of the annals and tacitus differently illustrate roman
history.--viii. characters and events corresponding to characters
and events of the xvth century.--ix. greatness of the author of
the annals.

i. before proceeding to point out the imitations, and show where,
in the efforts to write, and make history after the likeness of
tacitus, the author of the annals fails; and, from the signal
nature of his failures, his efforts are seen to be counterfeit, i
may observe that a constant endeavour on his part to escape
detection renders his imposture difficult to perceive and still
more difficult to expose. a man of his penetration and power to
enter far into subjects was, of course, deep enough to contrive
every species of artifice to conceal his fraud; and as we have no
record of his having been seen in the act of fabrication, or of
his ever having been even suspected of so doing, i must prove the
forgery by a detail of facts and circumstances. i can do this only
by going through the annals minutely,--examining the matter,
manner, treatment, knowledge, views, sentiments, language, style,
--in fact, a variety of circumstances,--everything that can be
thought of;--for if it really be a forgery, it cannot be exactly
like the history of tacitus in any one thing, whatever that one
thing be;--then i shall leave the reader to himself, to take into
account the whole of the circumstances, and judge whether such a
combination could have existed in a genuine work by tacitus, and
is compatible with such a production.

we are to look, first, what the nature of the history purports to
be;--whether there is nothing peculiar as to its character.

it will be obvious to the least sagacious that the most paramount
and absolutely necessary thing to be accomplished was a vast and
comprehensive execution that should correspond to the vast and
comprehensive execution of tacitus. here was something to be done
seemingly insuperable; for how can any one hope to imitate the
execution of another, with such marvellous nicety that no
distinction can be discerned between the two on the minutest test
of microscopic investigation? more especially if the execution to
be imitated be that of a man of real genius, consequently
unparalleled in its way, of a mighty nature, and, in addition to
its mightiness, a thing of the purest individuality. now, the
history of tacitus is an execution of this description; it is a
work of real genius; therefore, it is a distinct essence,--a
realization of all the special aptitude possessed by the master-spirit
that penned it. but though this cannot be done, yet any one
having genius,--and a powerful genius,--by following its bent
directly, may expect to exhibit in the execution of a work an
ability that shall be considered equal to the ability displayed in
the execution of another, even though that other be a man of great
genius; but it can only be upon this very sage precaution,--that
he exercises his ability, which must necessarily be of a very
different kind, in quite a different manner. the forger of the
annals had much too acute a discernment not to know this;--he was
also well aware that he had a very strong forte. we know the
department in which he excelled,--dealing with despotism,
servility and bloodshed. but then, if he was to do this, he would
do that, which would be a very strong proof that his work was a
forgery; for if he was to do this, he could not take up the
continuance of history as tacitus intended to go on with it
namely, with nerva and trajan;--that he could not do, because in
dealing with those two rulers he would have to deal with men
remarkable for mildness, generosity, leniency and good-
heartedness;--thus he would have to deal with a subject which must
be fatal to his attempt; for it would be opposed to the play of
his peculiar gifts, which to be brought out properly required that
he should write only of emperors noted for cruel, unnatural,
blood-thirsty tyranny. the plan of his undertaking, to be attended
with success, therefore compelled him, whether he liked it or not,
to go back to tiberius, caligula, claudius and nero.

ii. this must have been greatly against his will as a forger,
because this difficulty must have risen up before his mental
vision in colossal magnitude--that nobody, on careful
consideration, could admit that tacitus would have written the
narrative of the half-century from the death of augustus to the
accession of galba, after what he says at the commencement of his
history, that the subject next to engage his attention would be
the events that happened in the reigns of nerva and trajan. this,
i repeat, is a point that brings forcibly before us the certainty
of the annals being forged, unless any one can believe with
niebuhr that, if tacitus completed his history before the death of
trajan, and could not write of that emperor as long as that
emperor lived, but "feeling a void," and "desiring to produce
another work," he resumed history with the rule of tiberius; but
nobody can believe this, because it gets us into this enormous,
nay, inexplicable difficulty--why the writer, who, in the history,
had shown an epic construction, with an epic opening and an epic
story, should observe in the annals quite another arrangement, and
distribute the narrative in a studiously annalistic form? when,
too, the disjointed record of the journalist was to be combined
with the distinct arrangement of the historian who took the
continued transactions of a nation in their multiplicity of
details as they occurred at the same time in different places, and
related them in clear and due unity in the subject.

iii. out of this variance in the two works arises another
tremendous difficulty which we have to look at:--the annals and
the history are intended, the one to be the complement to the
other. then two works, which are necessary to each other, ought to
be, when separated, incomplete: if one man wrote them they would
be incomplete when separated; but if two men wrote them, they
would be complete in themselves. now, are the history and the
annals incomplete, when separated? or complete in themselves?
everybody acknowledges that they are complete in themselves; each
contains everything requisite for the full understanding and
enjoyment of each; each has its peculiar force; each its distinct
beauty; and for uniformity to exist in the two many passages in
both must be destroyed; and the most ingenious can give no just or
adequate cause for the destruction of the passages, even as he can
give no just or adequate cause for their existence, except that
which i am advancing that it was because two men wrote the two
works.

iv. this accounts at once for all the incongruities they owe their
existence naturally enough to the following simple causes:--the
different kinds of information possessed as well as the different
views of things entertained by two different individuals; and,
along with these, an occasional failing of the memory; for a man,
who forges such a very long work as the annals, must every now and
then forget,--however tenacious his memory may be,--what the man,
whom he simulates, has said, here and there, in this or that work,
upon some minor point in roman history, not associated with nor
essential to the principal thing he has always to keep steadily in
mind,--his main matter. thus we find no end of little trips in the
annals, many of which we will point out in their proper places as
we proceed with this investigation: at present it is sufficient
for the illustration of our remark to call the reader's attention
to this fact:--in the annals augustus is represented having as his
successors in the first degree tiberius and livia; in the second
degree his grandchildren and great-grandchildren, and in the third
degree the leading nobles, including even some of those whom he
hated, such, we may presume, as labeo, his detractor, gallus
asinius, who was thirsting for empire, and lucius arruntius, who
would have made the attempt to unseat him had the opportunity
presented itself:--"tiberium et liviam haeredes habuit ... in
spem secundam, nepotes pronepotesque: tertio gradu primores
civitatis scripserat, plerosque invisos sibi, sed jactantia
gloriaque ad posteros" (an. i. 8). such an account of augustus
adopting these relations, and, after them, strangers and enemies,
"out of vain-glory and for future renown,"--that is, to be admired
by posterity for an unexampled display of humanity,--could not
have been written by tacitus, being different in every respect
from what he relates,--and what he says, by the way, is also said
by suetonius,--that augustus, looking for a successor in his own
family, placed next to himself in dignity, so as to be prepared to
be his successor, his nephew, marcellus, then his son-in-law,
agrippa, next his grandsons, and lastly, his step-son, tiberius
nero:--"divi augusti, qui sororis filium, marcellum, dein generum,
agrippam, mox nepotes suos, postremo tiberium neronem, privignum,
in proximo sibi fastigio collocavit" (hist. i. 15).

such disagreements, due,--in all probability, more than to
anything else,--to the occasional failure of the memory,--are
sufficient in themselves to prove that the annals and the history
did not proceed from the same source. accordingly, the man who
forged the annals, having apparently, this overwhelming and
troublesome difficulty ever uppermost in his mind, seems to have
taken measures for guarding against it as well as he could, and
with as much care as he could. this taking precautions against the
failure of memory must have been one of the main reasons, why he
elected writing of tiberius, caligula, claudius and nero, when, as
tacitus, he ought to have written of nerva and trajan. he was thus
enabled to relate a series of events prior to, and entirely
different from the series of events related by tacitus; there was
thereby no possibility of his narrative clashing with that of his
archetype; the most trying difficulties were in this way got over
with sufficient ease; the only danger was with regard to a few
individuals who lived during the two periods, and a few facts,
that trailed their circumstances from one period into the other;
but his main history would have nothing in common with the main
history of tacitus.

v. to borrow a phrase of gualterius--he ran the risk of "falling
into scylla in trying to avoid charybdis":

 "incidit in scyllam, qui vult vitare charybdin."

how could he convince the world that tacitus would act with such
twofold inconsistency as to write of tiberius, caligula, claudius
and nero, when he had said that he would not do so, on account of
the number of writers who had recorded the occurrences of their
reigns, and that if he resumed the duties of an historian it would
be with the reigns of nerva and trajan. the world,--and nobody
knew it better than the author of the annals,--is easily
convinced; and there is no inconsistency, however monstrous, that
it considers unaccountable. he, therefore, set about the task of
convincing the world that tacitus did this. acting up to his own
maxim, that "the way to get out of disgraceful acts that are
evident is by audaciousness": "flagitiis manifestis subsidium ab
audacia petendum" (an. xi. 26), he resorted to audacity in a
trick, which has been hitherto eminently successful,--making the
world believe from a single remark which he introduced into his
narrative as the double of tacitus, that that noble roman was
really guilty of this twofold inconsistency, so that
changeableness, unsteadiness of purpose and self-contradiction
should seem to be his leading characteristics. without ever
intending to write the history of augustus,--or he never would
have begun the annals with an introduction in which he epitomizes
principal events in the roman state from its very foundation,
otherwise what had he left to himself in a subsequent historical
composition of a prior date for an appropriate exordium,--he says
in his third book that he would make the memorable events in the
reign of augustus the subject of a new history, should his health
and life continue:--"cetera illius aetatis memorabo, si plures ad
curas vitam produxero" (an. iii. 24)--evidently only because
tacitus had said at the commencement of his history, that he had
reserved as the employment of his old age, should his life be long
enough, the reigns of nerva and trajan:--"quod si vita suppeditet,
principatum divi nervae et imperium trajani ... senectuti seposui"
(hist. i. 1). there was then one and the same man saying in one
place:--"i am going to write the history of augustus when i am an
old man;"--(and this being said in the annals, the author of that
book must have wanted the world to presume that the writer would
have chosen the form of biography for it):--and in another place:
"i am going to write the history of nerva and trajan when i am an
old man"; (and this being said in the history, the author of the
annals must have supposed that the world might presume that the
writer would have chosen the form of history for this continued
production).

the author of the annals having done this, opened out before himself
the very widest field for indulging in all sorts of contradictions;
for, after this, who would not be, and who is not, prepared for any
contradictions? the contradictions come; and they are strange and
numerous.

vi. there is a systematic subordination of history to biography
throughout the annals, in which imperial events are sacrificed to
the prominence and effect of individual delineations: in the
history there is a general, comprehensive review of the empire at
the time of nero's death; rome is the centre, and the subject
matter the condition of a people affected by the imperial system
of government. the history conveys political instruction; the
annals supplies materials for studying the human mind and the
motives of human conduct: in imparting a knowledge of events
respecting the roman nation, the writer of the history, who is
gifted with graphic power, places _images_ before us, whereas
the writer of the annals, aware that in picturesqueness he was
inferior to tacitus, gives us _impressions_, while he investigates
social phenomena and elucidates the principles of human nature.
one work is historic, the other philosophic. one man generalizes,
the other particularizes. we are presented with one set of
interests in the history, with another set in the annals.
in the history we see the struggles of an empire and the
convulsions of the world; in the annals we are shut out from such
a prospect, to have our view limited to the deeds of one or two
emperors, and a few renowned individuals.

vii. such differences, so striking and so essential, prove the
annals to be a forged book; for all these differences in the two
works can only be ascribed to the entirely different turns of mind
peculiar to two writers. tacitus wrote as he did, from having a
profounder knowledge of the springs of action in the political
world than the author of the annals. the author of the annals,
surpassing tacitus with respect to the moral world, wrote as he
did, from knowing better the motives that influence men's minds,
and the passions that sway their hearts. the result of two such
very different men composing two such very different works, is,
that the contrast is almost as great when we turn from the history
to the annals, as when we turn from a general history of england
by a hume or a lingard where we notice the origin of englishmen's
liberties and privileges, the chivalrous scenes of the past and
the proud glories of the present, to the local record of some
county, as kent or lancashire, by a hasted or a baines, embodying
information of boroughs and parishes, town councils and
corporations, where such things become of substantial importance
as the clauses of charters, the collection of market dues,
donations of maces and drinking cups to mayors, and gold or silver
cradles to their ladies on the birth of babies during the year of
office.

if the annals is really to be considered a forgery, this, instead
of being a matter of surprise, ought to be just the thing to be
expected; because a clever fabricator, foreseeing that he would be
suspected, and eager to foil detection, would know that the
curious inquirer into a research of the present description would
thus become baffled at every turn from inability, if not to
discover it himself, at least, to explain to the satisfaction and
conviction of others, the incompatibility of the workings of one
spirit in one book with the workings of the other spirit in the
other book, when the two compositions were so differently
contrived. but if the annals is to be considered as genuine, then
nobody can explain why the same individual should illustrate roman
history in this singular fashion,--both works being designed, as
universally admitted, the one to be a complement to the other.
what should be the inducement of the author of the annals if he
did not wish the world to deny that it was his handiwork to write
his book so very differently from the history of tacitus? for what
was there in the times of rome under galba, otho, vitellius and
vespasian so very different from what the roman empire was under
their immediate predecessors, tiberius, caligula, claudius and
nero, that the part which has to do with events in the days of the
first-named four emperors should treat of imperial transactions
and be deficient in many of the memorials which claim notice in
the part dealing with tiberius, caligula, claudius and nero; and,
that the part which has to do with events in the times of the
last-named four emperors should all but avoid what is amply
recorded in the part, dealing with galba, otho, vitellius and
vespasian, imperial occurrences finding but an occasional and
almost accidental notice in the annals, where the mind is
encumbered with the minutiae of circumstantial details of
individual deeds.

viii. the author of the annals, who (as i shall convincingly show
hereafter) lived in the xvth century, seems, on account of that,
to have had a still stronger reason than those just given for
selecting as his subject the half century after the death of
augustus: its characters and events corresponded closely to the
characters of the princes who ruled, and the nature of the
movements that were going on all over europe in his time; for in
forging history, that was to pass as written by tacitus, it was
incumbent that he should have the same advantage as the roman,--be
on the same level with him in the occupation of ground. now, the
ground occupied by tacitus was the time of himself, which enabled
him to give a complete and copious reflex of a period through
which he had lived with thoughtful attention. thus his colours are
bright. unless antiquity supplied the author of the annals only
the framework of his picture, and the events of the time when he
lived gave the scenes for the painting, his colours would fail,
and his outlines become unsteady. in other words, there could not
be the scrupulous minuteness and the perfect freedom which make
history live and breathe, unless, like tacitus, he registered
facts in which he took the deepest interest, from feeling their
influence directly and powerfully exerted over himself, and the
living and loved around him. thus his hand, by being guided as the
hand of tacitus, would throw life into his work. and, truly, there
is as much life in the annals as in the history; but, instead of
the air of the first century breathing around it, it is the air of
the fifteenth.

this can be tested by many a character; one will suffice, that of
caius piso in the fifteenth book (48). pliny and juvenal tell us
that piso was consul suffectus under claudius: the tabulae arvales
add that he was a member of the college of twelve who offered
sacrifice when there was increase in the produce of the soil.
writers and records of antiquity say no more of caius piso, not
even mentioning the name of his father. on such a little known man
a forger of roman history could safely expatiate; the author of
the annals does so in a portraiture that bears the stamp of the
fifteenth century: this is particularly observable when piso is
spoken of as "of brilliant repute among the populace for virtues,"
or, rather, "qualities that wore the form of virtues,"--"species
virtutibus similes";--that he was "far from being morosely moral,
or restrained by moderation in pleasures; mild in temper and soft
in manners; given to pompous show and occasionally steeping
himself in luxurious excesses,"--"procul gravitas morum, aut
voluptatum parsimonia: lenitati ac magnificentiae et aliquando
luxui indulgebat." this does not appear to be at all applicable to
the character of any conspicuous personage belonging to the roman
empire in the first century, when romans were warriors still,
preserving, amid some effeminacy, much of the hardy vigour of
their republican predecessors, ever and anon throwing aside the
toga for the sagum, and rushing from the forum to the field, to
battle with ferocious and demi-nude savages, whom ever subduing
they carried home captives chained to their triumphal chariots;
but it does seem to be uncommonly applicable to a time when many a
priest, whose writings manifest a lax habit of thinking and betray
a levity, indeed, licentiousness, ill according with a religious
turn of mind, rose to the position of a great dignitary of the
church and a powerful arbiter of the destinies of his kind. as
that was an age when alexander vi. was a pope, and lucretia borgia
the daughter of a pontiff and consort of a reigning duke of italy,
we can readily credit the author of the annals, and laud him for
admirable, life-like portraiture, when he says that a character
and conduct, such as piso's, "met with the approbation of a large
number of people, who, indulging in vice as delightful, did not
want at the head of affairs a strict practiser of the moral duties
and an austere abstainer from vice:"--"pluribus probabatur, qui in
tanta vitiorum dulcedine summum imperium non restrictum nec
perseverum volunt."

the character is too vague in its outlines to be any particular
individual's; but as all its points fit many an italian priest who
became a cardinal or a bishop and a chief minister to a prince, in
the time of the renaissance, as well as in the period immediately
before it, and that immediately after it,--it shows how men
reflect the age they live in,--how the principal biographies in
any certain time convey a pretty accurate idea of the tone of mind
then prevailing; further, and above all, it shows to what a great
degree the books of the annals reflect the chief features of the
period when they were written, and how deeply their author enters
into the spirit of his age.

as with characters so with events. heaps of passages in the annals
read like incidents in the fifteenth century. it is more like a
picture in an italian court at that period than in a roman
emperor's in the first century, when the arrest is made of cneius
novius for being found treacherously armed with a dagger while
mixing with the throng of courtiers bowing to the prince; and then
when he is stretched on the rack, no confession being wrung from
him as to accomplices; and the doubt that prevailed whether he
really had fellow-conspirators. "cneius novius, eques romanus,
ferro accinctus reperitur in coetu salutantium principem. nam,
postquam tormentis dilaniabatur, de se non infitiatus conscios non
edidit, incertum an occultans." (an. xi. 22.)

ix. in this way do i fancy i perceive the author of the annals
chose his subject and worked his materials, so as to do most
justice to his talents, and more easily reach the height attained
by tacitus. when he had apparently thus sketched the plan of his
edifice, and set about struggling with the difficulties of the
elaboration, he encountered these with such eminent success that
the reality of his literary labour is one of the most surprising
facts in the history of the human mind. he seems never to have
once deviated from his design nor to have ever been perplexed by
embarrassments in the course of his undertaking, notwithstanding
the voluminousness of its nature. in such a procedure, where the
time he chose to descant upon fits in with all he wanted to
accomplish, we see the first indication of the vast judgment he
possessed, as well as the correct notion he had formed of the
extent of his superior powers. in detecting in the author of the
annals so much judgment and such an exact estimate of his great
mental faculties, we see the difficulty to be coped with in
distinguishing between him and tacitus, and thus in distinguishing
between the spurious and the genuine: but this distinguishing can
be accomplished by a minute, and only a most minute examination of
the two works.




chapter iv.

how the annals differs from the history.


i. in the qualities of the writers; and why that difference.
--ii. in the narrative, and in what respect.--iii. in style and
language.--iv. the reputation tacitus has of writing bad latin
due to the mistakes of his imitator.

i. statesmen learn the things which are of use to them in
government by reading the history, because tacitus recounts the
actions of the world under the imperial rule of rome. all men can
profit in the choice of morals from reading the annals, on account
of its writer relating principally the actions of sovereign
princes and illustrious persons in their private capacity.

this diversity of treatment results from the difference in the
qualities of the writers. tacitus possessed a consummate knowledge
of the true policy of states, and the use and extent of
government. accordingly, he reveals measures necessary for the
successful carrying on of war, or the proper and equitable
administration of affairs in peace, while he places before us a
graphic and presumably true picture of the mode in which the
romans ruled their empire in the first century of the christian
aera. the author of the annals was acquainted with an entirely
different form and order of statesmanship and politics. hence he
immerses us in crooked turnings of false policy and dark intrigues
of bad ambition, forcibly reminding us of what made the greatest
portion of the european art of government in the fifteenth century
towards the close of the mediaeval and the commencement of the
modern periods. he favours us with a paucity of maxims relating to
government in general, or the different branches and offices which
make up the body politic; but enters, with tedious fulness, into
the rise, operation, consequences and proper restraint of the
genuine passions and natural propensities of mankind in
individuals, public and private.

we search in vain in the history for any trace of the melancholy
that we find in the annals; and in vain do we look in the annals
for any pictures of virtue and lessons of wisdom which in the
history are taught us by bright examples and illustrious actions.
had the same hand that wrote the annals written the history, we
should have had in the latter work a very different treatment. the
record would have been dark and dismal, even to repulsion, the
opportunities being ample for an historian of gloomy disposition
to indulge his humour, when the character of the history is thus
described with truth in the preface to sir henry saville's
translation of it:--"in these four books we see all the miseries
of a torn and declining state; the empire usurped; the princes
murdered; the people wandering; the soldiers tumultuous; nothing
unlawful to him that hath power, and nothing so unsafe as to be
securely innocent." then, after stating what we learn from the
examples of galba, otho, vitellius and vespasian, the writer adds:
"in them all, and in the state of rome under them, we see the
calamities that follow civil war, where laws lie asleep, and all
things are judged by the sword." in going over such a dreary
period of human history, tacitus is as composed and cheerful as if
he was dwelling on the gayest and brightest of themes.

the cause of this is to be found in the fact that there was
nothing to overshadow the soul of tacitus with gloom. however
painful and dire may have been the constraint to other romans
during the fifteen years' rule of domitian, he had no ground of
complaint: far from that; for he says that he was advanced by that
emperor further in dignity than by vespasian and titus. in the
reign of trajan he must have been supremely happy; for he speaks
of it himself as "a time of rare felicity,"--"rara temporum
felicitate,"--when men might "think what they pleased and express
what they thought." his domestic life must have been blest by the
perfect devotion and tender attachment of a wife, who, then in her
prime, had surely verified the brilliant hopes of the promising
bride. (agr. 9.) in the maturity of his days he lived again in his
children; for that he had children we know from the emperor
tacitus, a century and a half after, boasting of being his
descendant, a pride that was shared in the fifth century by
polemius, a prefect of gaul, as we learn from a remark of the
prefect's friend, sidonius apollinaris. he enjoyed the most
brilliant of literary reputations, as the anecdote sufficiently
reveals of a stranger, who, addressing him at a public spectacle,
and being informed that he must know him well from his writings,
remarked: "then you must be either tacitus or pliny." he was happy
in the friendship of pliny the younger, and men as good, eminent
and distinguished as that elegant disciple of cicero's.

there was then nothing, in the fortunes of tacitus to make him
trenchant, biting and cynical; but, on the contrary, most gentle,
as he was, and most placid and benign. such being his character, a
kind interpretation and a candid sense of actions and individuals
meet us on every page of his history. still in enumerating the
virtues of eminent persons he does not omit their vices or
failings: his way of doing this is peculiar. he tells us sabinus
served the state for five and thirty years with great distinction
at home and abroad, and was of unquestionable integrity, but adds
jestingly "he talked too much."--"quinque et triginta stipendia in
republica fecerat, domi militiaeque clarus; innocentiam
justitiamque ejus non argueret: _sermonis nimium erat_."
(hist. iii. 75.) otho and vitellius quarrel and charge each other
with debaucheries and the grossest crimes; the historian then,
with dry humour, remarks, "neither was wrong":--"mox, quasi
rixantes stupra et flagitia invicem objectavere: _neuter
falso._" (hist. i. 74.) this witty and ridiculing vein does not
prevent him from being always kindly. the benignity of his nature
is seen in all his portraitures (which look, by the way, like the
portraitures of real men); it is observable in his character of
licinius mucianus (i. 10), cornelius fuscus (ii. 86), helvidius
priscus (iv. 5), and others;--lovely portraits where defects or
peccadilloes are given along with real and positive virtues, and
in an antithetical manner. his antithetical manner is preserved in
the annals; but, instead of blandness, we come across a propensity
to form unfavourable opinions of character and conduct, as when
the athenians are designated "that scum of nations":--"colluviem
illam nationum" (ii. 55); and octavia, "the sprig of a gipsy
fiddler" [endnote 074]:--"tibicinis aegyptii subolem." (xiv. 61)
there is wit and ridicule in both works, but it is not the wit and
ridicule of the same individual; it is sprightly and amusing in
the history; it is ungracious and actually cruel in the annals.

this difference in the writing of tacitus and the author of the
annals may be accounted for in many ways,--perhaps in none better
than this:--when tacitus lived no one despaired of public cares
being attended to, or the plans of the wise being employed in
advancing the national welfare; but when the author of the annals
lived, everybody despaired; private profligacy was as rampant as
public misery, and, amid the universal degeneracy, scheming
politicians disregarded the good and greatness of their country to
be intriguers at court for the improvement of their position.

those were the times when louis xi. supplied the places of the
ministers and marshals, the generals and admirals of france, the
dunois, the la tremoilles, the brezes and the chabannes with mere
creatures--new and obscure men who aided him in his artful schemes
and plans of government: he made his barber an ambassador, his
tailor a herald at arms, and his phlebotomist a chancellor: he
imposed enormous taxes on the people, and when the people
revolted, he ordered some of the ringleaders to be torn to pieces
alive by horses, and the others to be beheaded, as occurred at
rheims, angers, alencon and aurillac. francis of carrara, the lord
of padua, cruelly murdered the venetian general, galeaz of mantua,
when the doge and council of venice refused to ratify the terms of
a capitulation. suspicion attached to the peace in which ivan
basilowitch lived and ruled in his palace at moscow, surrounded
completely by a wooden wall. enclosed, too, by a very large tract
of land, and in a most magnificent mansion which he built for
himself and his companions at ripaglia, a place pleasantly
situated on the lake of geneva, amedeus, the last count and first
duke of savoy, so abandoned himself in his unobserved private and
solitary life, to all kinds of debaucheries, that desmarets says
in his "tableau des papes" (p. 167) that from that originated the
phrase "to feast and make merry,"--"faire repaille"; yet this very
amedeus afterwards acted the part of the only true pope at tonon
during the greater portion of the two years, 1440 and 1441, having
been elected to the pontificate by the fathers of basle during the
papacy of eugenius iv. when the throne of don carlos, the infant
of navarre, was usurped, on the death of his mother, blanche of
navarre, by her husband, john i. of aragon, a disgraceful quarrel
and a prolonged war ensued between father and son, when the son,
being repeatedly defeated in battle, was finally captured and cast
into prison by the father, and poisoned by his mother-in-law;
although he was deserving of a better fate, being an enlightened
prince who wrote a history of the kings of navarre, which is still
preserved in the archives of pampeluna. a blind and feeble old
monarch, muley albohacan, king of granada, ordered the massacre of
a number of children by his first marriage; ziska destroyed 550
churches and monasteries in germany alone; and, for attempting
reforms in religion, huss and jerome of prague were cruelly burnt
alive at the stake. these and similar horrors of those distressful
times, which find fit counterparts in revolting incidents in the
annals, could not but deeply affect the soul of a man ardently
loving liberty and devoted to humanity as, unquestionably, was the
forger of that work: hence throughout his book the sting which
misfortune gives, and the moodiness which melancholy begets.

a spirit of liberty runs through his work; but the spirit is not
the same as that which pervades the history of tacitus any more
than that his merits are like the roman's in precision of
delineating actions and characters. the good temper of tacitus
causes him to differ from other writers in the estimation of
character. he gives a better account of galba and vitellius than
suetonius; of vitellius and nero than the abbreviator of cassius
dio, xiphilinus, of otho than juvenal; and of vinius than
plutarch. galba, who, in suetonius, puts to death, with their
wives and children, the governors in spain and gaul who did not
side with his party during the life of nero, is, with tacitus, a
prince remarkable for integrity and justice, and such faults as he
has are not, strictly speaking, his own, but those of worthless
friends who abuse his confidence, for we are told that it is the
pernicious counsels of titus vinius and cornelius laco, the former
depraved and profligate, the other slothful and incapable, which
first lose him the popular favour and ultimately prove his ruin:
"invalidum senem titus vinnius et cornelius laeo, alter deterrimus
mortalium, alter ignavissimus, _odio flagitorum oneratum,
contemptu inertiae destruebant_." (hist. i. 6 _in._) vitellius,
who, according to suetonius, puts one of his sons to death, and
poisons his mother, or starves her to death, is, in tacitus, a
tender father doing all for his offspring that fortune permits him
to do in his excess of adversity (hist. ii. 59), and a respectful,
sensitive son seeking to abdicate his empire in order to rescue
his parent from impending evils. (hist. iii. 67.) juvenal shows us
otho carrying into the tumult of the battle-field the effeminacy
that disgraces him in time of peace; tacitus represents otho as an
active warrior (hist. ii. 11); and convinces us that there was
more of good than evil in that emperor. xiphilinus paints the wife
of vitellius as wickedly dissolute; tacitus as a respectable woman
of whom the state had no complaint to make in her misfortune. he
can find virtues even in vinius (hist. i. 13), whom the roman
people execrated and whom plutarch castigates in terms of
unmeasured reprehension.

the author of the annals brings before our vision quite opposite
reflections from the mirror of life: his pictures are quite horrid
of revolting crimes unrelieved by virtuous actions in tiberius,
claudius, nero, sejanus, agrippina, messalina, albucilla, and
other men and women. his character of tiberius is the wonderfully
drawn portrait of the most absolute and artful tyrant that was
ever created by the fancy of man; and we may be as certain that
such a character never existed as we may be assured that that the
wise maxims and fine things were ever uttered which he tells us
passed the lips in private of emperors and ministers of state.
though not a single virtue relieves the vices of tiberius in the
annals, suetonius speaks of him as showing clemency when a public
officer; cassius dio describes him as so humane that he condemned
nobody for his estate, nor confiscated any man's goods, nor
exacted money by force; and velleius paterculus makes him all but
a pattern of the virtues,--if velleius paterculus is an
authority,--it being just possible that his "historiae romanae ad
marcum vinicium consulem" may some of these days be as clearly
proved to be as glaring a modern forgery, as i am now attempting
to prove the annals of tacitus to be: certain it is that what we
have of velleius paterculus is supplied by only one ms., which was
found under very suspicious circumstances in very suspicious
times.

ii. the general train of the narrative may be as nervous in the
annals as in the history; but the latter is proof against all
objections to imperfection and hurry of narrative: every now and
then errors of this description mar the workmanship of the annals,
showing at once that it was not composed by tacitus. from what he
did in the history, he never would have abruptly dropped the
proceedings in the senate with regard to tiberius and the honours
paid to his family: there would have been a measure of time and
place in the campaigns of germanicus: he would have told us what
urged piso to his acts of apparent madness; and whether he was
guilty or innocent of poisoning germanicus: we should have known
whether the adopted son of tiberius came to a violent end; whether
agrippina perished on account of food withheld from her in her
dungeon; and how julia, the granddaughter of augustus died. this
habit of occasionally neglecting to impart complete information,
which is not at all in the manner of tacitus, cannot be due to the
difference of arrangement in the two works; which, in itself, is a
very suspicious difference; for the plan in the annals is to give
the transactions of every year in chronological order, whereas
that in the history is not to keep each year distinct in itself,
but allow occurrences to find their proper place according to
their nature, before the time when they happen. [endnote 081]

in addition to this very suspicious difference, there is another
producing so much doubt that alone it seems to stamp with truth
the theory of the annals being a forgery.

tacitus passes over in silence men renowned for learning who took
no part in the historical events related by him. the author of the
annals, at the end of one historic year, before passing on to
record the events of that which follows, mentions their deaths, as
of the two famous juris-consults, capito ateius and labeo
antistius. (iii. 74.) in this style of writing we detect two men
differing from each other as widely as de thou differs from
guicciardini: de thou, confining himself to his own times,
descends into minutiae, so as to record the deaths of the great
men of his day; guicciardini, with his eye fixed on his country,
passes over memorials of individuals to dwell on the various
causes which brought about the great changes in the civil and
ecclesiastical policy of his stirring period.

another thing extremely suspicious is that nowhere in his history,
nor even in his biographical work, agricola, does tacitus
introduce a whole letter. all that he does is to give the
substance, and not the contents, as the letter from tiberius to
germanicus in germany. (hist. v. 75.) elsewhere he refers merely
to the contents of letters, as in the second book of the history (64).
speeches are found in his works, for this reason:--speeches form
no small part of what is transacted in the senate, at the army
and before the emperor; they issue to the public, they pass
through the mouths of men, and they form much weighty matter.
tacitus then seems to have thought that if he inserted speeches,
he would be maintaining the majesty of history by attending to
great matters, but that if he inserted letters, as they refer
generally to private affairs, he would be faulty as an historian,
by ceasing to be grave and becoming trifling. there is no
accounting, then, for the letter that is found in the annals (iii. 53),
if we are to assume that that work was the composition of
tacitus, except we are ready to admit that he was capable of
descending from the accustomed gravity of his lofty historical
manner to be a rival for supremacy in the small style of such
indifferent memoirists, as vulcatius gallicanus, who has almost as
many letters as there are pages in his very short life of the
emperor avidius cassius. [endnote 083]

nobody can satisfactorily explain why, or how it was possible
that, tacitus should have contradicted in the annals what he says
in the history of the legions of rome and the praetorian and urban
cohorts. he tells us in his history that his countrymen had
legions in britain, gaul, and italy; in the annals we are told
that the romans had no troops in those countries. we gather from
the annals, that there were eight legions in germany, three in
spain, and two each in moesia, africa, and pannonia; from the
history we find that there were seven legions in germany, three in
moesia, two in spain, and one each in africa and pannonia. we are
told in the history that the praetorian cohorts were nine, in the
annals ten. so we are told in the history that the urban cohorts
were four (_quatuor urbanae cohortes_ scribebantur) (hist. ii. 93), and
in the annals three (insideret urbem proprius miles, _tres urbanae_).
(an. iv. 5.) it matters not what are the right statements in these
several instances; all that concerns us in our inquiry is that,
here beyond all question are two different men, possessing quite
a different knowledge, informing us about the same things; and
the disagreements would be mighty puzzling on any other theory
than that which we are advancing,--that two different men wrote
the history and the annals.

so, again, with respect to the twenty-one, and afterwards twenty-five
priests of apollo, the "sodales augustales," otherwise styled
"sacerdotes titii," the latter name being given to them, according
to varro, after birds similarly called, whose motions it was their
duty to watch in certain auguries (though what the ancients called
the "titius," by the way, is about as little known as what pliny
calls the "spinthurnyx,"--servius and isidorus thinking they might
have been "doves," from such fowls being styled by the common
people "tetas" and "tetos"). livy makes no mention of these
priests; neither does dionysius of halicarnassus, though dionysius
was very fond of entering into details of roman antiquities.
tacitus gives one origin to this priesthood, the author of the
annals another; tacitus, describing the gladiatorial shows by
which the birthday of vitellius was celebrated in the year 15,
says, that the emperor tiberius consecrated those priests to the
julian house, in imitation of their first institutor, romulus, who
consecrated them to king tatius: (facem augustales subdidere: quod
sacerdotium, ut _romulus tatio regi_, ita caesar tiberius
juliae genti, _sacravit_.) (hist. ii. 95.) the author of the
annals, as if this passage had entirely slipped his attention, or
dropped from his memory, or forgetting that he was engaged in the
forgery of a work by tacitus, corrects that view by making quite a
different statement, that it was king tatius, and not romulus, who
first instituted, and apparently consecrated that order of
priesthood to himself, his exact words being: "that same year saw
established a new religious ceremony, by the priesthood being
added of the 'augustales sodales,' as of yore titus tatius, to
retain the holy rites of the sabines, had instituted the 'sodales
titii'":--idem annus novas caermonias accepit, addito sodalium
augustalium sacerdotio, ut quodam _titus tatius_ retinendis
sabinorum sacris _sodales titios instituerat_. (an. i. 54.)
as many writings bearing upon the remote time of romulus and the
sabine kings may be lost, and the author of the annals may have
had, in the fifteenth century, authorities not extant now, to
warrant him in writing history so very differently from tacitus;
and as that roman in such matters must have taken what he said on
trust from others, we cannot here decide who was right and who
wrong; but what is most important in this investigation is that
the disagreement is quite sufficient to convince us that tacitus
did not write the annals.

we shall hereafter more particularly distinguish the two works by
other differences in their matter and form, the manner of their
authors, and the substance of the things treated of: for the
present we may proceed to distinguish them by some differences in
their style and language.

iii. in these respects nothing is easier than to detect two
writers, no matter how careful they may be in endeavouring to
imitate the style and language of each other: there will always be
some shade,--and indeed, a very strong shade,--whereby to
distinguish their manner of thinking and their choice and
arrangement of words; there will be more or less purity,
simplicity, grace and propriety in their choice of language; more
or less beauty, precision, cadence and harmony in their
collocation of words: their cogitative faculty will vary in
measure of thought--in force or tenuity; nor will they resemble in
their train of ideas,--be that regular, methodical and uniform, or
unsteady, scattered and disorderly. there must ever be these
important differences; they spring out of individual idiosyncrasy;
their exercise is involuntary, being dependent upon the native
taste and turn of mind of the writer; from such influence he can
no more escape, than he can avoid in his physical qualities a
peculiar gait or tone of voice, look, laugh, or mode of bearing.
if any one question this, let him take up any of the dramas
written conjointly by members of the school of shakespeare in the
reign of james the first. they all tried to shape themselves in
the same mould; they served apprentices to one another in
constructing and composing the drama; cartwright strove to write
like his instructor, ben jonson; massinger like his master,
shakespeare; shakespeare, too, like marston and robert green (for
marston taught him how to write tragedy, and green taught him how
to write comedy): they believed that they eminently succeeded in
catching each other's manner, and to such a nicety, that they
could write together, without the handiwork of one being
distinguishable from the handiwork of the other. in this spirit
shakespeare wrote with fletcher; dekker with william rowley; ford,
too, with dekker; numerous others similarly composed in
companionship, middleton, marston, day and heywood; but any one
acquainted with their separate productions, consequently, with
their style and language can hardly fail to point out what this
one wrote, and what was written by the other. test this by
shakespeare, who, it would be supposed, is the most difficult to
detect because it is generally stated and believed that he wrote
in a variety of styles; it is only a seeming variety; his mode of
versification certainly differs--he changed his measures with his
subjects; still the same fancy is always at work, impressing
images with strength on the mind; there is no change in the
weightiness of the style, the quaintness of the language, the
justness of the representations, the depth of the reflections,
whether he be writing the two worst plays in which he took part
(for portions only seem to have been supplied by him), pericles
and titus andronicus, or his two best, conceived so massively and
executed in such a masterly manner, macbeth and othello. in the
two noble kinsmen, which he wrote with fletcher, any body familiar
with his acknowledged dramas, can trace him as easily as a
traveller follows with his finger the course of the rhone while
that river is traversing the lake of geneva; for one can tell with
as much certainty, as if assured of it, that he wrote the whole
opening of that tragedy, or first act, while his light, airy and
more sprightly collaborator wrote all the closing part, or last
act.

now, the author of the annals seems to have displayed remarkable
diligence in a careful study of the style and language of tacitus
with the view of reproducing them in the multiplicity and variety
of expressions that would necessarily occur in the course of the
very long work he meditated forging. to judge from his handiwork,
he was specially struck by certain peculiarities:--such as
dignified and powerful expression, with extraordinary conciseness
joined to loftiness of diction;--hence, his brevity, being
dissembled, and altogether foreign to his own natural diction,
which was most copious, has a hardness and obscurity, of which the
brevity of tacitus is totally void. he seems to have furthermore
observed how the language of tacitus has a poetical complexion, is
figurative, nor altogether free from oratorical tinsel with
mixture of foreign, especially greek construction, and the most
peculiar, new and unusual turns of expression, alliterations and
similar endings of words. yet notwithstanding all this care and
diligence he was utterly incapable of approaching in language and
style so close to the great original he pretended to be as to be
confounded with him; he was, indeed, not a bit more successful in
approaching his prototype, than that emulous imitator of tacitus,
ammianus marcellinus.

much might be taken from the excursus of roth and the prolegomena
of doederlein and boetticher greatly to strengthen this part of my
argument; but, their treatises being well known, i abstain, merely
observing that, from their remarks, it will be seen that only in
the annals are verbs constructed in a very uncommon and frequently
archaic manner, as the ancient perfect, _conpesivere_ (iv. 32), of
which there is no example in tacitus, as there is in catullus:

    o latonia, maximi
    magna progenies jovis,
    quam mater prope deliam
   _deposivit_ olivam. xxxiv. 5-8.

it will be also seen in the above-mentioned most able production
of doederlein that the infinitive and the particles _ut, ne_
and _quod_ are joined with many verbs; that there is an
interchange of _ad_ and _ut_ (an. ii. 62); a joining of
the present and the perfect, and a joining of the infinitive with
those two tenses. in the midst of this damaging criticism
doederlein quotes walther, who has also commented upon the annals,
but in terms of enthusiastic commendation, for he praises such
writing as first-rate workmanship--"adjustments by design," says
the ingenious german; not, of course, the unconscious errors, that
a modern european might make in a case of forgery: the discovery
reminds me of mr. ruskin's unqualified eulogies of everything done
by the brush of turner, which caused the great artist to observe:
--"this gentleman has found out to be beauties what i have always
considered to be blemishes."

professor hill, also, in his "essay upon the principles of historical
composition" has noticed in the annals some modes of construction
not to be met with in any roman writer, such as a wrong case after
a verb,--a genitive after _apiscor_ which governs an accusative:
"dum _dominationis_ apisceretur" (vi. 45); and an accusative after
_praesideo_ which governs a dative: "_proximum_ que galliae _litus_
rostratae naves praesidebant" (iv. 5).

iv. here let me pause for a moment to glance at a prodigious thing
that has been done to tacitus: it really has no parallel in
literature: a number of foreigners have impugned his knowledge of
his native tongue. the learned german, rheinach (beatus rhenanus),
began, for he could not admit in his basle edition in 1533 of the
works of tacitus that the language of that roman was equal to the
language of livy, being florid, affected, stiff and unnatural; his
observation being, that "though tacitus was without elegance and
purity in his language, from latin in his time being deteriorated
by foreign turns and figures of speech; yet there was one thing he
retained in its entirety, and that was blood and marrow in his
matter": "quamvis tacitus caruerit nitore et puritate linguae,
abeunte jam romano sermone in peregrinas formas atque figuras;
succum tamen et sanguinem rerum incorruptum retinuit." eight years
after the famous tuscan lawyer and scholar, ferretti, followed by
accusing tacitus in the preface to the edition of his works
published at lyons in 1541, of writing with inelegance and
impurity: "consequently," he says, "in the estimation of eminent
literary men tacitus is not to be ranked after, but rather before
livy; and yet his style, which was florid, though smacking of the
thought and care that pleased in the days of vespasian and his
son, and which, from that time,--on account of the latin language
gradually declining in purity,--steadily degenerated into a kind
of affected composition, ought not to be placed on a par with nor
preferred to livy's, whose language flows naturally and agreeably,
for his was the age of the greatest purity": "unde factum, ut
praestantium in literis virorum judicio livio non sit postponendus
tacitus, quin potius anteferendus: non quod hujus floridum, ac
meditationem et curam olens dicendi genus, quale sub vespasianis
placuit, ac indies exin degeneravit in affectatam quandam
compositionem, exolescente paulatim sermonis latini puritate,
livianae dictioni, illi naturaliter amabiliterque fluenti (nam id
seculum purissimum fuit), aequari debeat, aut praeferri." next
came the milanese schoolman, alciati, who preferred the certainly
sometimes elegant and polished phrases of paulus jovius (in his
letter to jovius himself prefixed to the edition of 1558 of the
renowned bishop of nocera de' pagani's principal production, the
45 books of historia sui temporis):--"they will not ask of you the
reason why you have not reached the soft exuberance of livy, after
you have thoroughly regretted imitating the calm solemnity of
sallust, and been satisfied with only the few flowers you have
plucked with a discriminative hand out of the gardens of quintus
curtius more frequently than the thorny thickets of cornelius
tacitus": "non reposcent a te rationem, cur lacteam livii
ubertatem non sis assecutus; postquam et te omnino piguerit
sallustii sobrietatem imitari, et satis tibi fuerit pauculos
tantum flores ex quinti curtii pratis, soepius quam ex cornelii
taciti senticetis arguta manu decerpsisse." then succeeded, as
fast as flakes falling in a snow-storm, a long string of acute
critics, each with his just objections, and each more pointed than
his predecessors in his animadversions, down to the present day,
when, i suppose it may be said that the eminent dr. nipperdey
stands foremost amongst the exposers of the bad latinity of
tacitus. the tacitus, thus universally proclaimed, and for nearly
a dozen generations, not to be a competent master of his own
tongue, is not the tacitus of the history, it is the "tacitus" of
the annals; and when hereafter i point out who this "tacitus" of
the annals was,--an italian "grammaticus," or "latin writer" of
the fifteenth century,--the reader will not be at all surprised
that he every now and then slips and trips in latin;--on the
contrary, the reader would be amazed if it were not so; because he
would regard it as a thing more than phenomenal,--as a matter
partaking of the miraculous;--he must consider himself as coming
in contact with a being altogether superhuman;--if the "tacitus"
of the fifteenth century, who, as a florentine, may have been a
complete master of the choicest tuscan, had written with the
correctness of the tacitus of the first century, who, as befitted
a "civis romanus" of consular rank, was perfectly skilled in his
native tongue;--aye, quite as much so as livy, sallust, or any
other accomplished man of letters of ancient rome.




chapter v.

the latin and alliterations in the annals.


i. errors in latin, (_a_) on the part of the transcriber;
(_b_) on the part of the writer.--ii. diction and
alliterations: wherein they differ from those of tacitus.

i.--an anecdote is told of our present sovereign that, on one
occasion, conversing with the celebrated scene painter and naval
artist, clarkson stanfield, her majesty, hearing that he had been
an "able-bodied seaman," was desirous of knowing how he could have
left the navy at an age sufficiently early to achieve greatness by
pursuing his difficult art. the reply of stanfield was that he had
received his discharge when quite young in consequence of a fall
from the fore-top which had lamed him,--and for the remainder of
his life,--whereupon the queen is stated to have exclaimed: "what
a lucky tumble!" in a similar strain the author of the annals,
after he had handed over his work, according to the custom of his
time, for transcription, must have been induced to exclaim, when
he marked how the monk who had put his thoughts on vellum, had
made him write nonsense in almost every other sentence: "what a
lucky transcriber!" the knowledge that he would have a transcriber,
who was no adept in latin, must have been one of the greatest
factors in his calculations as a forger. otherwise how could
he entertain the shadow of a hope that his book could pass current,
when, in order that it should take its place in the first rank
of roman classics, it was imperative that he should write latin
to perfection. that was impossible; and his fabrication must
have been detected immediately upon its publication, even though
his age was destitute of philological criticism, unless everybody
had known that the scribes in convents who copied the classics
were famous for committing endless blunders in their transcriptions.
thus, his good fortune stood steadfastly by him all through his
extraordinary forgery; at its initiation as well as during the
subsequent stages of it.

there was in his time a regular profession of transcribers, who
may be looked upon as the precursors of printers. numbered among
them were some who had great fame for transcribing;--learned men,
who knew latin almost, if not quite, as well as they knew their
mother-tongue, cosimo of cremona, leonardo giustiniani of venice,
guarino of verona, biondo flavio, gasparino barzizza, sarzana,
niccoli, vitturi, lazarino resta, faccino ventraria, and some
others;--in fact, a host; for nearly all the literary men, in
consideration of the enormous sums they obtained for copies of the
ancient classics carefully and correctly written, devoted
themselves to the occupation of transcription, as, in these times,
men of the highest attainments in letters, some, too, of the
greatest, even european, celebrity, give their services, for the
handsome remunerations they receive, to the newspaper and
periodical press. but, in the fifteenth century, the vast majority
of writers of manuscripts,--those who were in general employment
from not commanding the high prices obtained by the "crack"
transcribers, and might be compared to "penny-a-liners" among us,
suppliers of scraps of news to the papers,--were still to be found
only in convents, knowing more about ploughs than books, and for
literary acquirements standing on a par with professors of
handwriting and dancing masters of the present day. these monkish
transcribers wrote down words as daws or parrots articulate them;
for just as these birds do not know the meaning of what they
utter, so these scribes in monasteries did not understand the
signification of the phrases which they copied. we can easily
understand how to these manipulators of the pen an infinite number
of passages in the annals, which are still "posers" to the most
expert classical professors in the leading universities of europe,
must have been as dark as the delphic oracle,--or the punic
speech of the carthaginian in plautus's comedy of poenulus to
everybody (except, of course, the great oriental linguist, petit,
who knew all about it, for in the second book of his
"miscellaneorum libri novem" he explains the whole speech, without
the slightest fear of anybody correcting the mistakes into which
he fell).

the jumble occasioned by the interminable blunders of the monastic
writers (for there were two of them, as will he hereafter seen)
causes both the codices of the annals to be phenomena for
confusion. unique as literary gems, and preserved in the
laurentian medicean library in florence, they are the greatest
attraction to literary sightseers visiting the lucky library in
which they are carefully deposited; and, i believe, have a fancy
value set upon them as a fancy value is set upon the koh-i-noor.

any member of the medical faculty, even the latest licentiate of
the apothecaries hall, who knows the fatal effect of wear and tear
upon the system caused by ceaseless worry, can explain why
philippo beroaldi the younger departed this life five years after
undergoing the labour of preparing for the press at the order of
leo x. the ms. found in the westphalian convent, containing the
first six books of the annals. when we consider the chaos in which
that dismal ms. presented itself to the eyes of the unfortunate
professor in the university of rome, we can readily conceive how
he must have consulted, as he told us he did, "the learned, the
judicious and the subtle" about the correction of errors of the
knottiest nature which came upon him so fast that, to express
their abundance, he instinctively borrows his figure of speech,
from water gushing from a fountain or coming down in a cataract:--
"the old manuscript," says he, "from which i have undertaken to
transcribe and publish this volume, _gushes forth_ with a multiplicity
of blunders:"--"vetus codex, unde hunc ipsum describendum atque
invulgandum curavi, pluribus mendis _scatet_." one example, out
of a legion, will suffice:--in the passage in the eleventh book
where narcissus is represented begging pardon of claudius for not
having told him of messalina's intrigue, the mss. at florence and
rome run thus (according to the report of james gronovius):
"is veniam in praeteritum petens quod ci cis v&cticis plaucio
dimu-lavisset." half a century before, vindelinus of spire,--
who distributed books to all the inhabitants of the world as
triptolemus of old distributed corn,--broke the back-bone of
this gibberish, when first publishing the concluding books (from
that vatican ms. which is no longer to be found), by editing
"quod _eicis vecticis plautio dissimu_ lavisset." beroaldi altered
this to "quod _ei cis vectium plaucium dissimu_ lavisset." this
was retained in all editions, as the best that could be thought of,
till justus lipsius, who collated the mss. of tacitus in the
vatican library, as he collated the mss. of other ancient authors
in that and the farnese and sfortian libraries, during his two
years stay in rome, changed it to "quod _ei cis vectium cis
plautium dissimu_ lavisset." so for a century that remained as
the latest improvement till again amended by john frederic
gronovius, who, seeing the vatican and florentine mss. while
searching the treasures of literature in italy during his tour in
that country, edited _cis vectios cis plautios_. most editors
adopt, according to fancy, the rendering of lipsius or gronovius,
on account of vectius valens and plautius lateranus being two
distinguished romans in the days of claudius who intrigued with
messalina. for my own part, i prefer the conjectural emendation of
the bipontine editors who, giving up as hopeless the corrupted
passage, edit "quod _incestae uxoris flagitia dissimu_ lavisset,"
which, if not precisely what was written, carries with it the
recommendation of being intelligible, and doing away with
the unmeaning _cis_.

on account of the corruption of the text in the two oldest mss.
that supply the annals,--the first and second florence,--i am
aware what care must be taken, when touching upon the latin in the
annals, not to ascribe to the author faults that were the errors
of other people. one ought to be guarded when coming across
"reditus," which ought to be "rediturus" (ii. 63), and "datum,"
which ought to be "daturum" (ii. 73).

i must pause to observe that, here as elsewhere, in examining the
latinity of the annals, i cite from the original editions of the
last six books by vindelinus of spire published in 1470, and the
first six books by beroaldus published in 1515, all editions now
in use having "rediturus" and "daturum," but without the authority
of a single ms.

these blunders we may fairly father on the monkish transcribers,
the more so as their handiworks abound with faults, arising from
one of these four causes,--inability of perceiving propriety of
expression; which people call "stupidity"; disinclination to the
requisite exertion; known as "laziness";--misunderstanding the
meaning of the author, or destitution of knowledge.

the errors that spring from ignorance are the most striking; they
show the purely negative state of the transcribers' minds; how
uninformed they were of facts, and how uninstructed in arts,
literature or science. evidently the transcriber of the first six
books had never heard of the "sacerdotes titii," and seeing that
the author had mentioned tatius in the first portion of the clause
in a passage in the first book (54), he writes "sodales _ta_tios,"
instead of "sodales _ti_tios";--"ut quondam titus _tatius_ retinendis
sabinorum sacris sodales _tatios_ instituerat"; just as evidently,
from ignorance of the language, having no notion what the author
was saying in another passage in the second book (2), but seeing
that he had used the word "majorum" in the previous sentence, he
writes nonsensically "ipsorum _majoribus_" for "ipsorum _moribus_"
(ii. 2); nor knowing what the "propatulum" was in a roman house,
but misled by the author having almost immediately before (iv. 72)
spoken of "soldiers being fastened to the patibulum"--or, as we
should say, "hanged on the gallows,"--he writes (iv. 74), "in
_propatibulo_ servitium" instead of "in _propatulo_ servitium,"
the "propatulum" being an open uncovered court-yard, differing
from the "aedium," as being in the forepart of the dwelling.

how illiterate he and the transcriber of the last six books were
will be seen in examples and remarks by kritz in his prolegomena
to velleius paterculus; by doederlein in his preface to his edition
of tacitus; by ernesti in his notes to the annals; by sauppe, the
able editor of the oratores attici, in his epistolae criticae,
addressed to his learned relation, godfrey hermann, and, above
all, by herae, in his "studia critica," or elaborate treatise on
the florentine manuscripts of tacitus. both transcribers seem to
have had a taste for rhyming and to have thought that the beauty
of writing latin consisted in obtaining jingles, to get which they
mix up two words into one, as "san_us_ repert_us_," for "san_e_ is
repertus" (vi. 14); or coining, as "_templores flores_," for
"_templorum fores_" (ii. 82); or changing the termination of a word,
in order that it may resemble in sound, the word that follows, as
"don_aria_ mili_taria_" for "_dona militaria_" (i. 44); or the
word that precedes, as "potu_isset_ tradi_disset_" for "potuisset
tradi" (xii. 61).

the same bungling is shown with respect to adjectives, the number,
gender and case of which are changed, as "tris_tios_ primordio,"
for "tris_tiores_ primordio" (i. 7); "amore an odio incert_as_"
for "amore an odio incert_um_" (xiii. 9), and "conqueren_tium_
irritum laborem," for "conqueren_te_ irritum laborem" (xv. 17).
the number, mood and tense of verbs are also changed as "quotiens
concordes agunt sper_nun_tur: parthus," for "quotiens concords
agunt, sper_ni_tur parthus" (vi. 42); "nationes promptum habe_re_"
for "nationes promptum habar_et_," and "neque dubium habe_retur_"
for "neque dubium ha_betur_." (xii. 61).

they sometimes succeed, from their stupidity or laziness, in
completely puzzling the reader by omitting syllables, and transposing
and substituting consonants and vowels, thus producing the most
confounding gibberish, as "_pars nipulique_" for "pharasmani
polemonique" (xiv. 26); or adding a letter, as "m_orte_m" for
"m_ore_m" (iii. 26), or omitting a syllable, as "eff_unt_" for
"eff_und_unt" (vi. 33). from the same fault they every now and
then double a letter, as "ami_ss_iam" for "ami_s_iam", or omit
one of the double letters, as "antefe_r_entur" for "antefe_rr_entur"
(1. 8); or, when two words occur, one ending, and the other beginning
with the same letter, they either omit the last letter of the
preceding word, as "event_u_ suetonius" for "event_us_ suetonius"
(xiv. 36), or the first letter of the following word as "quipped
_l_apsum" for "quippe _e_lapsum" (v. 10). but it is in single
syllables or words or letters that they most abound in errors,
frequently omitting them without the mark of a _lacuna_, or any
defect; now they omit single letters, when the second word begins
with the same letter as that with which the first ends; at times
in the first word, as "victori_a_ sacrari," for "victoria_s_ sacrari"
(iii. 18); at times in the second word, as "ad _e_os" for "ad _d_eos"
(i. 11) now they add single letters as "vitae ejus" for "vit_a_ ejus"
(i. 9), or "a_u_diturus" for "aditurus" (xv. 36); or voluntarily
add a syllable, that the termination of one word may correspond
to the commencement of another, as "stratonicidi_ve_ _ve_neri" for
"stratonicidi veneri" (iii. 63), or repeat syllables or words
(what is called "dittography"), as "cujus adversa pravitati _ipsius_,
prospera ad fortunam _ipsius_ referebat" (xiv. 38). puteolanus
was the first to throw out the second _ipsius_, and substitute
for it "reipublicae," which most of the editors of tacitus have
retained, though brotier edits, i cannot help thinking properly,
on account of the antithesis in which the author of the annals
delighted:--"whose adversity he ascribed to his depravity, and
whose prosperity to his good fortune":--"cujus adversa, pravitati
ipsius; prospera, ad fortunam referebat" (xiv. 38); so that the
second _ipsius_ in the ms. is not wrong, only inelegant and unnecessary.

having thus seen the nature of the errors committed by the transcribers,
we may now pass on to what we must consider as the errors of the
writer. there is very little doubt that he alone is responsible
for the following: using the poetic form "celebris" for the prose
form "celeber"--romanis haud perinde _celebris_ (ii. 88, in fin.),
which so startled ernesti that he is almost sure the author must
have written "celebratus;" still he would not dare to alter it on
account of its being repeated on two other occasions--pons mulvius
in eo tempore _celebris_ (xiii. 47): servilius, diu foro, mox
tradendis rebus romanis _celebris_ (xiv. 19);--so merely contents
himself with the observation that "those who are desirous of writing
elegant latin will not imitate it:" "studiosi elegantiae in scribendo
non imitabuntur." those desirous of attaining an elegant style
would not write as in the annals, "exauctorare," with the meaning
of "putting out of the ranks and into the reserve," as when we find
it stated that "a discharge should be given to those who had served
twenty years, and that those should be _put out of the ranks and
into the reserve_, who had gone through sixteen years' service,
there to be kept as auxiliary troops, free from the other duties
which it was customary to render to the state, except that of
repelling the invasion of an enemy":--"missionem dari vicena stipendia
meritis; _exauctorari_, qui senadena fecissent, ac retineri sub
vexillo, ceterorum immunes nisi propulsandi hostis" (an. i. 36);--
here we have a meaning of the word "exauctorare" very different
from its sense of "a final discharge," in which it is understood
by tacitus towards the opening of his history, when he is
describing the distracted state of rome, and continues: "during
such a crisis tribunes were _finally discharged_, antonius
taurus and antonius naso, from the body guard; aemilius pacensis
from the troops garrisoned at rome, and julius fronto from the
watch": "_exauctorati_ per cos dies tribuni, e praetorio
antonius taurus et antonius naso; ex urbanis cohortibus aemilius
pacensis; e vigiliis julius fronto" (hist. i. 20);--nor would a
person desirous of writing graceful latin use "destinari" for
being "elected" to an office, as "_destinari_ consules" (an. i. 3)
where tacitus uses "designari,"--"consule _designato_"
(hist i. 6).

grammatical mistakes of the most extraordinary character are
sometimes made. there is neglect of indispensable attraction; "non
medicinam _illud_" (i. 49) for "_illam_," and "non enim, preces
sunt _istud_" (ii. 38) for "_istae_;"--proper latinity requires
that, in "nihil reliqui faciunt quominus invidi_am_, misericordi_am_,
met_um_ et ir_as_ _per_mov_erent_ (i. 21), the four nouns should
be in either the ablative or genitive, and the verb in the present,
with (as dr. nipperdey says) _moveant_ in preference to _permoveant_.
"an" is used as an equivalent to "vel;"--"metu invidiae, _an_ (vel)
ratus" (ii. 22,) and as if synonymous with "sive," "sive fatali
vecordia, _an_" (seu, or sive) "imminentium periculorum remedium"
(xi. 26.) in the sentence where tiberius is described as, according
to rumour, being pained with grief at his own and the roman people's
contemptible position for no other "reason" more than that tacfarinas,
a robber and deserter, would treat with them like a regular enemy:--
we have the only instance in a classical composition reputed to be
written by an ancient roman, of "alias" conveying the idea of _cause_,
instead of being an adverb of _time_:--"nec _alias_ magis sua
populique romani contumelia indoluisse caesarem ferunt, quam quod
desertor et praedo hostium more agerat" (iii. 73).

these errors we must believe to be the author's; considering their
gravity, we are compelled to ask ourselves the question: "could
this writer have been an ancient roman?" if we answer in the
affirmative, how can we explain coming repeatedly across this sort
of writing, "lacu in ipso" (xii. 56), that is, a monosyllabic
preposition placed between a substantive and an adjective or
pronoun, a kind of composition found in the poets, but disapproved
by the prose-writers, who, if so placing a preposition, used a
dissyllable and put the adjective first. independently of a
monosyllabic preposition thus standing frequently between a
substantive and an adjective or pronoun (judice _ab_ uno:
iii. 10--urbe _ex_ ipsa: xii. 56--senatuque _in_ ipso and
urbe _in_ ipsa: xiv. 42 & 53.--portu _in_ ipso xv. 18); there
are other occasional abnormal collocations of the preposition,
such as, after two words combined by a copulative particle,
or two of them: diisque et patria _coram_ (iv. 8), poppaea
et tigellino _coram_ (xv. 61) and between two words connected
by apposition: montem _apud_ erycum (iv. 43), uxore _ab_ octavia
(iv. 43--xiii. 12). these usages are not found in the other
works ascribed to tacitus, nor any of the ancient latin
prose-writers; though common enough in the poets, the three
instances being found in virgil;--the first in the aeneid:--

   "cum litora fervere late
    prospiceres arce _ex_ summa:"
    aen. iv. 409-10;

   "vespere _ab_ atro
    consurgunt venti:" aen. v. 19-20

and--

   "graditur bellum _ad_ crudele camilla:"
    ib. xi. 535;

the second in the georgics:

   "si non tanta quies iret frigusque caloremque
   _inter_:"
    georg. ii. 344;

and shortly after,

   "pagos et compita _circum_:"
    ib. 382;

and the third in the aeneid:

   "duros mille labores
    rege _sub_ eurystheo, fatis junonis iniquae,
    pertulerit:"
    aen. viii. 291-3.

the latinity, therefore, is good; but though good, it can scarcely
be said to be that of an ancient roman; for an ancient roman never
resorted to such inflexions in prose, only when writing poetry to
get over the difficulties of rhythm; hence a modern european would
easily fall into the error, from taking the latin of virgil to be
most perfect; and from deeming that what was done in verse could,
with equal propriety, be done in prose.

though nothing could be more natural than for a modern european to
think that the right latin for "good deeds," was "bona facta"
(iii. 40), an ancient roman would have written "_bene_ facta,"
just as he would have used for the expression "if bounds were
observed," "si modus _adhiberetur_," not "si modus _adjiceretur_"
(iii. 6). he would have followed "inscitia" with a genitive,
as tacitus, "inscitiam ceterorum" (hist. i. 54), and not with
a preposition, as "finis inscitiae _erga_ domum suam" (xi. 25),
for "an end of ignorance of his family"; nor have used that noun
absolutely, as "quo fidem _inscitiae_ pararet" (xv. 58); "in order
that he should create a belief in his ignorance." instead of
"hi _molium objectus_, hi proximas scaphas scandere" (xiv. 8),
for "some clambered up the heights that lay in front of them,
some into the skiffs that were nigh at hand," he would have used
the participle, "_moles objectas_"; and written "_loca_ opportuna"
instead of "_locorum_ opportuna permunivit" (iv. 24), for "he fortified
convenient places."

ancient writers among the romans, such as cicero and livy, used
the comparative in both clauses with quanto and tanto; the more
recent writers, such as tacitus and sallust, used the comparative
with them in, at least, one clause. we find in the annals these
ablatives of quantus and tantus, as if their real force was not
known, used with the positive in both clauses. a european putting
into latin: "the more closely he had at one time applied himself
to public business, the more wholly he gave himself up to secret
debaucheries and vicious idleness;" would think his language quite
correct when he wrote: "quanto _intentus_ olim publicas _ad_ curas"
(mark the place of the monosyllabic preposition), "tanto occultos
_in_ luxus" (again), "et malum otium _resolutus_" (iv. 67).

a roman did not use the verb "pergere" in the sense of "continuing
or proceeding" in a _matter_, only of "continuing or proceeding"
where there is _bodily motion_. yet the author of the annals for
"things would come to a successful issue, that they were going on
with," has "prospere cessura, quae _pergerent_" (i. 28); an ancient
roman would have written "per_a_gerent," as may be seen from livy,
who expresses "i will go on with the achievements in peace and war":
"res pace belloque gestas _peragam_" (ii. 1); pliny, "let us now go
on with the remainder": "reliqua nunc _peragemus_" (n.h. vi. 32, 2);
and cornelius nepos, "but he went on, not otherwise than one would
have thought, in his purpose": "tamen propositum nihilo secius
_peregit_" (att. 22). as many will believe, contrary to myself,
that this was a blunder of the copyist (notwithstanding that it
is not in the style of his blundering), i will not insist upon it;
though i must insist upon the following being an error on the part
of the writer for "giving praises and thanks":--"laudes et grates
_habentem_" (i. 69): a roman could not have said that: had he used
"laudes et grates," his phrase would have been "laudes et grates
_agentem_";--had he used "habentem," his phrase would have been
"laudes et grat_iam_" (or grat_ias_) "habentem." "diisque et
_patria_ coram)" (iv. 8), is much more in keeping with the ragged
language of st. jerome in his vulgate than the precision of tacitus
in his history:--there are two mistakes: the first is the collocation
of the preposition which has been already noticed; the second is the
phrase "standing before the _eyes_ of a country," which is the real
meaning of "patria _coram_"; it is akin to "looking a matter in the
_face_," which is met with,--(and which i almost deem elegant,)--
in the cumbrous oratory of lord castlereagh, but which i should be
very much astonished to discover had originated from the lips of
another statesman, the very opposite in speech of the renowned
foreign secretary,--the ornate and correct rhetorician, so famed
for the concinnity of his phrases, the earl of beaconsfield.

ii. from the diction point of view, the annals could not have been
written by tacitus, as the language at times is anybody's but his.
when "ubi" signifies "where" (at the place itself), and not
"whither" (to a distance from the place where a person stands),
"answer me, blaesus, _whither_ have you thrown the corpse?"
"responde, blaese, _ubi_" (quo?) "cadaver abjeceris?" (i. 22)
it is the language of suetonius in that passage in the life of
galba, where he speaks of patrobius casting the emperor's head
into that place, where by galba's order patrobius's patron had
been assassinated; "eo loco, _ubi_" (quo) "jussu galbae
animadversum in patronum suum fuerat, abjecit" (galb. 20). when
two words are coupled with que--que we have the language of the
poets, virgil, ovid, terence, silius italicus, manilius, and among
prose writers, sallust (exempli gratia) "meque regnumque" (jug. 10)
when "infecta" is used in the sense of "poisoned," "infected":
"the times were so infected and soiled with sycophancy"--"tempora
illa adeo _infecta_ et adulatione sordida fuere" (iii. 65),
we have the language of pliny the elder, when speaking of honey
"not being infected with leaves," that is, not having the taste of
leaves--"minime fronde infectum" (n.h. xiii. 13); and when "que,"
as if it were "et," means "too," or "also,"--"till that was _also_
forbidden": "donec id_que_ vetitum" (iv. 74), and "his mines of
gold, _too_": "aurarias_que_ ejus"(vi. 19), we have the language
of pliny the younger, "me, _too_, from boyhood," "me_que_ a pueritia"
(ep. iv. 19). just as cicero uses "domestic" for "personal;"--"exempla
domestica, "_my own_ speeches" the author of the annals uses "at home"
for "personal," and "personally";--"_domi_ artes" (iii. 69),
"_personal_ qualities;"--"_domi_ partam" (xiii. 42), "_personally_
acquired." when he desires to put into latin: "how honourable
their liberty regained by victory, and how much more intolerable
their slavery if again subdued," he writes: "quam decora victoribus
libertas, quanto _intolerantior_ servitus iterum victis" (iii. 45),
misapplying "intolerantior" for "intolerabilior" with florus (iv. 12),
who is clever in committing errors in grammar and geography. there
is ringing the changes with livy, when we read in the annals (ii. 24)
"_quanto_ violentior, _tantum_" (for tanto) "illa," and in the great
roman historian, "_quantum_" (for quanto) "laxaverat, _tanto_ magis"
(livy xxxii. 5). it is using, too, in the sense of livy (xli. 8, 5)
the verb "differere," instead of the customary expression, "rejicere."
the language is peculiar to himself when he uses "differre" for
"spargere" in the phrase "and to be spread abroad among foreigners":
"differique etiam per externos" (iii. 12), as the style is peculiar
to himself in omitting the past time (fuisse) when no doubt is left
by the preceding context or the immediate sequel in the same sentence,
that the past time is referred to in the passage where silius
boasts that "his soldiers continued to be loyal, while others fell
into sedition; and that his empire would not have remained to
tiberius, if there had been a desire for revolution also in those
legions of his": "suum militem in obsequio duravisse, cum alii ad
seditiones prolaberentur: neque mansurum tiberio imperium, si iis
quoque legionibus cupido novandi fuisset" (iv. 18), where after
"mansurum," according to dr. nipperdey, there should be "fuisse."

further proof is afforded by the use of the word "imperator," that
the diction in the annals is not that of tacitus. having lived in
the time of the caesars, he never could have heard a countryman in
speech or writing use "imperator" other than as signifying one
individual, not the commander in chief of the army, but the
occupant of the supreme civil authority, "imperator" being the
noun proper of "imperium." in this restricted sense tacitus always
uses the word, because it was understood with that signification
by every roman of his time. for example, in his agricola (39), he
means by "imperatoria laus" "the renown in arms of the emperor,"
who was then domitian. the author of the annals, who was not aware
of this nice distinction, uses imperator, not as it was used in
the time of tacitus, but as it was used in the days of the
republic. he, too, like tacitus, uses the noun in its adjectival
form, but he does not apply it, as tacitus does, to that which
belongs to the emperor, but to that which belongs to a general;
for he means by "imperatoria laus" (ii. 52), "the fame of a
general," even of germanicus. he seems to have thought that it
could be given to any member of the imperial house, for he applies
it without distinction to germanicus, who was the son of an
emperor, as to the emperors caligula, claudius and nero, when
speaking of the daughter of germanicus, agrippina, who was the
mother of nero, wife of claudius and sister of caligula: "quam
_imperatore genitam_, sororem ejus, qui rerum potitus sit, et
conjugem et matrem fuisse" (xii. 42); he applies it even to the
wife of an emperor's son, for he styles agrippina, the wife of
germanicus, "imperatoria uxor" (i. 41); he gives the title to the
barbarian generals among the germans (ii. 45), which no roman in
the time of the empire, or, perhaps, even of the republic, could
have possibly done; and, further, to military chiefs, who
corresponded then to our present generals of division, for, when
speaking of caractacus as "superior in rank to other _generals_
of the britons," he expresses himself: "ceteros britannorum
_imperatores_ praemineret" (xii. 33).

that a modern european wrote the annals is also very clear from
the undistinguishing use in that work of the cognate word,
"princeps," which, like "imperator," had two different meanings at
two different periods of roman history, meaning, in the time of
the republic, merely "a leading man of the city," and, in the time
of the empire, the emperor only. this every roman, of course,
discriminated; hence tacitus everywhere uses the word in its
strictly confined sense of "emperor" (hist. i. 4, 5, 56, 79 _et al._).
for "the leading men of the country," his phrase is not, as a
roman would have expressed himself in the republican period,
"principes viri urbis," but "primores civitatis." the author of
the annals, who was in the dark as to this, uses "principes" in
the republican sense of "leading men," as occurs in the
observation: "the same thing became not the _principal
citizens_ and imperial people" (meaning, the aristocracy and
freemen), "as became humble" homes (meaning, the dregs of the
populace), or, "states" (meaning, the occupants of thrones): "non
cadem decora _principibus viris_ et imperatori populo, quae
modicis domibus aut civitatibus" (iii. 6). he also misapplies the
word to the sons of emperors, as if he were under the impression
that they were styled "princes" by the ancient romans as by modern
europeans, for thus he speaks of the sons of tiberius, drusus and
germanicus: "except that marcus silanus out of affront to the
consulate sought that office for the _princes_": "nisi quod
marcus silanus ex contumelia consulatus honorem _principibus_
petivit" (iii. 57).

the author of the annals is quite as remarkable as tacitus for
antithesis: sometimes two antitheses occur together in tacitus in
the same clause. he is as remarkable for an equal balancing of
phrases. but only in the annals is the style of tacitus mingled
with the manner of some other roman writer, as the easy and
flowing redundance of livy (i. 32, 33); the peculiar
alliterations, triplets, ring of the sentences and flow of
narrative of sallust (xiv. 60-4), the antiquated expressions, new
words, greek idioms, and concise and nervous diction throughout of
that historian; along with words and phrases, borrowed from the
poets, especially tibullus, propertius, catullus, above all,
virgil.

there is neither in tacitus, nor the author of the annals, the
strength and sublimity of expression found in that great master of
rhetoric, cicero. the eloquence of tacitus is grave and majestic,
his language copious and florid. the language of the author of the
annals is cramped; and he maintains a dignified composure, rather
than majesty; occasionally he has an inward laugh in a mood of
irony, as when commending claudius for "clemency," in allowing a
man,--whom he has sentenced to execution, to choose his own mode
of death. his close, dry way, too, of saying things savours of
harshness, and differs widely from the greek severeness of manner
observable in tacitus. the crucial test is to be found in a few
trifling matters of style. so far from displaying the same care as
tacitus to avoid a discordant jingle of three like endings, he
will write bad latin to get at the intolerable recurrence. rather
than have a similar ending to three words tacitus will depart from
his rule of composition which is to balance phrases,--"dissipation,
industry"; "insolence, courtesy";--"bad, good";--but to avoid
a jingle he writes "luxuria, industria"; _comitate, arrogantia"_;
"malis bonisque artibus mixtus" (hist. i. 10), his usual style
of composition requiring "luxuri_a_, industri_a_; arroganti_a_,
comitate." he prefers incorrect latin to such sounds. he writes,
"coque poppaeam sabinam--deposuerat" (hist. i. 13), instead of
what the best latinity required, "coque j_am_ poppae_am_
sabin_am_." the author of the annals, not having his exquisite
ear, nor abhorrence of inharmonious concurrence of sounds,
actually goes out of his way, by disregarding grammar, carefully
to do tacitus, also by disregard of grammar, as carefully avoided,
to procure three like endings, as "uter_que_ opibus_que_ at_que_
honoribus pervignere" (an. iii. 27), when tacitus would have
unquestionably written, "uterque opibusque _et,_" and, moreover,
have written correctly, because the romans never followed "que"
with "atque," always with "et."

the author of the annals falls into the opposite fault of having
three like beginnings as "_a_dhuc augustum _a_pud" (i. 5), which
is in the style of livy or cicero, but not tacitus. at the same
time no writer is so fond of alliteration as tacitus; yet he
resorts to it with so much judgment, that it never grates on the
ear, and with so much art that it all but passes notice. it is
perceptible in the germany and the agricola as well as the
history; though in the latter work it is carried to greater
perfection, and is more systematically used, being found in almost
every paragraph. the rule with tacitus is this:--when he resorts
to alliteration in the middle of a sentence where there is no
pause, he uses words that differ in length, as "_justis
judiciis_ approbatum" (hist. i. 3), "_tot terrarum_ orbe"
(i. 4), "_pars populi_ integra" (6); and so throughout the
history, till at the close, we find the same thing uniformly going
on:--"_miscebantur minis_ promissa" (v. 24); "_poena
poenitentiam_ fateantur" (v. 25); "_vespasianum vetus_
mihi observantiam" (v. 26). but--and particular attention is
called to this--when the alliteration is found at the end of a
sentence, or (where there is a pause) in the middle of a sentence,
he prefers words of the same length, but different quantities, as,
at the beginning of the history;--_senectuti seposui_ (i. l);
"_plerumque permixta_; "_sterile saeculum_" (ibid); and so
throughout the work to the end, where we still find the same
regularity of identical alliteration: "_clamore cognitum_"
(v. 18); "_coepta coede_" (v. 22); "_oequoris electum_"
(v. 23); "_merito mutare_" (v. 24). this peculiarity of
composition, so distinctive of tacitus, unfortunately for his
forgery, entirely escaped the attention of the author of the
annals; he seems to have thought that any kind of alliteration, so
long as it was constantly carried on, would sufficiently mark the
style of tacitus. accordingly he has all kinds of alliterations,
except the right ones, for they are quite different from, and,
indeed, the very reverse of those of tacitus; sometimes they are
twofold (i. 6); sometimes threefold (i. 5); sometimes even four
together--"posita, puerili praetexta principes" (i. 8);--from
which last tacitus would have shrunk with horror at the sight, as
mozart is stated to have rebounded and swooned at the discordant
blare of a trumpet. as to using in the middle of sentences words
that differ in length as a rule they do not, from the first of the
kind, "_ortum octo_" (i. 3), to the last of the kind, "_voce vultu_"
(xvi. 29); at the end of sentences, he uses words that, instead of
not differing, do differ in from the first of the kind, "_augustum
adsumebatur_" (i. 8), to the last of the kind "_sortem subiret_"
(xvi. 32) and "_sestertium singulis_" (xvi. 33).

after this overwhelming proof of forgery, i need not press another
syllable upon the reader. if not convinced by this, he will be
convinced by nothing; for here is just that little blunder which a
forger is sure to make: so far from being insignificant it is all-
important; it swells out into proportions of colossal magnitude,
at once disclosing the whole imposture, it being absolutely
impossible that tacitus should have so systematically adhered to a
particular kind of alliteration in that part of his history which
deals with galba, otho, vitellius and vespasian, and have so
suddenly and utterly neglected or ignored it in that part of the
history which deals with tiberius, caligula, claudius and nero.


end of book the first.





book the second.

bracciolini.


    si per se virtus sine fortuna ponderanda sit, dubito an hunc
    primum omnium ponam.
     cornelius nepos. _thrasybulus._




chapter i.

bracciolini in rome.


i. his genius and the greatness of his age.--ii. his qualifications.
--iii. his early career.--iv. the character of niccolo niccoli, who
abetted him in the forgery.--v. bracciolini's descriptive writing
of the burning of jerome of prague compared with the descriptive
writing of the sham sea fight in the twelfth book of the annals.

though i have dwelt on the harshness of style and manner, and the
occasional inaccuracies in grammar and language of the author of
the annals, it must not be supposed that i fail to appreciate his
merit. in some of the qualities that denote a great writer he is
superior to tacitus; nor can anyone, not reading him in his
original form, conceive an adequate notion of how his powers
culminate into true genius,--what a master he is of eloquence, and
how happy in expressing his very beautiful sentiments, which,
sometimes having the nature of a proverb or an epigram, please by
the placing of a word. his general ideas are scarcely retained in
a translation: such a reproduction deprives them of the train of
images and impressions which cluster round them in his language of
poetry and suggestion, giving them spirit and interest, and
imparting to them strength and ornament:--as winter is thrown over
a landscape by the hand of nature, so coldness is thrown over his
page by the hand of a translator: the student who can familiarize
himself with his thoughts as expressed in the tongue in which he
wrote, and reads a translation, is in the position of a man who
can walk in summer along the bank of a majestic river flowing
beautifully calm and stately by meadows pranked with flowers and
woods waving in varied hues of green, yet prefers visiting the
scene in winter when life and freshness are fled, the river being
frozen, the flowers and greenness gone from the fields, and the
leaves fallen from the trees.

the question arises,--who was this wonderful man? if unknown, can
he not be discovered?

john leycester adolphus, famous for his history of george the third,
discovered the author of the waverley novels in sir walter scott,
when the wizard of the north was styled "the great unknown," by
pointing out coincidences in the pieces and poems, known to be
the productions of scott, in such matters as the correct morals,
the refined manners, the scotch words and idioms, the descriptive
power, the picturesque and dramatic fancy, the neat, colloquial
turns in dialogue, the quaint similes, the sprinkle of metaphors,
the love of dogs, the eloquent touches with regard to the pure
and tender relations of father and daughter; and clinched the
investigation by showing the freedom and correctness in the use
of law-terms and phrases, which indicated clearly that the author
was a lawyer. it being easy when a way has been shown to follow
in the track, i turned to the period in question, which, i knew,
must be the first half of the fifteenth century, to look for a writer,
whose qualities, literary and moral,--or rather immoral,--could win
for him the triumphal car of being the author of the annals--if
triumph can, in any way, be associated with such ingloriousness
as forgery,--and, after a little looking about, i found him in
one whose compositions display, not to a remote, but in a close
degree the energy, the animation, the feeling, the genius, the
true taste, the deep meaning, and glimpses, ever and anon, of that
signal power, which, rising into truly awful magnificence, of
looking deeply into the darkest recesses of the human heart,
runs through the annals like the shining waters of a river in
whose rich sands roll grains of gold.

the age of that writer was instinct with mental power: men were
giants of intellect: italy had soared to the highest pinnacle in
the domain of mind, unequalled by preceding ages, except those of
pericles and augustus: beginning in the fourteenth century with
dante and petrarch, and ending at the beginning of the sixteenth
with the father of the modern political system, machiavelli, it
rose to the highest point of its altitude, and remained there
through the whole of the fifteenth, when such bright lights shone
constantly in the meridian of mind, as that prince of the church,
cardinal sadoleti, great as a poet, equally great as a philosopher,
whose poems on curtius and the curtian lake and the statue of laocoon
would have done honour to virgil, while in his "de laudibus philosophiae"
cicero lives again in style and manner of thinking.

during that long interval of splendour, achievements of the
intellect are upon record that fully establish the existence of
the most remarkable genius. poliziano in a letter (ep. xii. 2) to
prince pico of mirandola tells of one of these marvellous feats
that was done by a youthful prodigy, only eleven years old, of the
great family of orsini (fabius ursinus). first young, fabio orsini
sang; then recited verses of his own: requested to turn the verse
into prose, he repeated the same thoughts unfettered by measure in
an unassuming manner, and with an appropriate and choice flow of
expression. after that subjects were proposed to him for
epistolary correspondence, on which he was to dictate ex tempore
to five amanuenses at once, the subjects given being "of a nature
so novel, various, and withal so ludicrous that he could not have
been prepared for them": after a moment's pause he dictated a few
words to the first amanuensis on one subject; gave his
instructions on a different theme to the second; proceeded in like
manner with the rest, then returning to the first, "filled up
every chasm and connected the suspended thread of his argument so
that nothing appeared discordant or disjointed," and, at the same
instant, finished the five letters. "if he lives," concluded
poliziano, "to complete the measure of his days," and "perseveres
in the path of fame, as he has begun, he will, i venture to
predict, prove a person, whom, for admirable qualities and
attainments, mankind must unite to venerate as something more than
human."

in that age some men had such an enthusiastic predilection to
antiquity that they were animated by an ardent zeal for collecting
ancient manuscripts, medals, inscriptions, statues, monumental
fragments, and other ancient and classical remains. others, again,
were suspected of the intention to impose their own productions on
the public as works of antiquity; one man, who never ceased to
regret that it had not been his lot to live in the days of roman
splendour, peter of calabria, styled himself in his commentaries
on virgil, julius pomponius sabinus, and in his notes to
columella, julius pomponius fortunatus, his object in both
instances being that he should be mistaken for some roman who had
flourished in the purest ages of latinity; and foy-vaillant, the
celebrated numismatist of the seventeenth century, actually places
him, in one of his numismatical works, in the list of ancient
authors, while justus lipsius and pithaeus both took him to have
been a "grammaticus", or "writer in latin," of the earlier middle
ages, all the time that he was an italian academician, who
flourished in the fifteenth century, having been born in 1425 at a
place that has been called "the garden of almond trees,"--
amendolara, in upper calabria.

it would be idle to suppose that the author of the annals was
actuated by the simple purpose of peter of calabria; there is
ground for believing that some deeper, and less pure, motive
instigated him to commit forgery. though no peter of calabria, he
was a matured fabio orsini; and the only drawback from his
fabricated work is that it is not to be looked upon as roman
history, always in the most reliable shape, but rather as a form
of the imagination which he selected for expressing his views on
humanity;--to paint crime; to castigate tyranny; to vindicate
honesty; to portray the abomination of corruption, the turpitude
of debauchery and the baseness of servility;--to represent
fortitude in its strength and grandeur, innocence in its grace and
beauty, while standing forth the sturdy admirer of heroism and
freedom; the tender friend of virtue in misfortune; the austere
enemy of successful criminality, and the inflexible dispenser of
good and evil repute.

that a man of such great parts and extensive learning, with such
fine thoughts, beautiful sentiments and wise reflections;--such a
cool, abstracted philosopher, yet such an over-refined
politician;--such a gloomy moralist, yet such an acute, fastidious
observer of men and manners, was a cloistered monk or any obscure
individual whatever was an idea to be immediately dispelled from
the mind, for that the annals was composed by such a man would
have been about as incomprehensible an occurrence, as it would be
impossible to conceive that an acrobat who exercises gymnastic
tricks upon the backs of galloping horses in an american circus
could discharge the functions of a first lord of the treasury or a
justice in the high court of judicature, or that a pantaloon in a
christmas pantomime could think out the principia of sir isaac
newton or the novum organum of lord bacon. the fact was, the
author was a conspicuous, shining light of his generation; the
associate of princes and ministers; who, from the commanding
position of his exalted eminence, cast his eyes over wide views of
mankind that stretched into sweeping vistas of artifice and
dissimulation; and who, for close upon half a century,
participated prominently in the active business,--the subdolous
and knavish politics,--of his time.

ii. everybody knows the fable of the old man, the boy and the ass;
but not one in a thousand knows that it was written nearly four
hundred years ago by a man who for forty years was a member of the
secretariate to nine popes, from innocent vii. to calixtus iii.
first in the bugiale of the vatican, where the officers of the
roman chancery, when discussing the news of the day, were making
merry with sarcasms, jests, tales and anecdotes, one of the party
having observed that those who craved popularity were chained to a
miserable slavery, it being impossible from the variety of
opinions that prevailed to please everybody, some approving one
course of conduct, and others another, the fable in question was
narrated in confirmation of that statement.

poggio bracciolini was not only the author of that fable, i am now
about to bring forward reasons for believing, and with the view of
inducing the reader to agree with me, that he,--and nobody else
but he,--was the writer of the annals of tacitus.

he was in every way qualified to undertake, and succeed in, that
egregious task. he was one of the most profound scholars of his
age, more learned than traversari, the camaldolese, and if less
learned than andrea biglia, superior to the augustinian hermit in
a more natural, easy and cultivated style of composition and in a
wider knowledge of the world: acquainted somewhat with greek and
slightly with hebrew, he possessed a masterly and critical
knowledge of latin which he had carefully studied in his native
city, florence, with the most accomplished latinist of the day,
petrarch's valued friend, the illustrious giovanni malpaghino of
ravenna.

bracciolini was not of a character to have revolted at the
baseness of fabrication;--an inordinate love of riches, more
devouring in his breast than his next strongest passion, love of
knowledge, was sufficient to egg him on to it. throughout life,
his moral conduct was unfavourably influenced by the scantiness of
his means. it was to beguile the anxiety occasioned by his narrow
circumstances that he devoted himself to intense study, from
knowing that superior attainments combined with splendid talents
would secure for him great offices of trust and profit: he saw how
those who were esteemed the most learned as well as the most able
gained the best lucrative posts under the governments of the popes
and princes of his day: he, therefore, employed himself in the
pursuit of knowledge for the sake of attaining high rank and great
wealth; knowledge was, accordingly, only so far pursued by him as
it would be productive of money, and get him through the world in
honour and affluence. up to the age of twenty-six he had the run
of, what was then considered,--when good manuscripts were
uncommonly costly and very scarce,--a magnificent library of 800
volumes, that belonged to his veteran friend, coluccio salutati,
chancellor of the republic of florence; amid those stores of
knowledge he courted the muses ardently, all the while cultivating
diligently the acquaintance of the leaders of society, uniting the
character of the scholar with that of the man of the world, and
becoming as accomplished in politeness and as profound in mastery
of the human heart as in scholarship and learning;--qualities
conspicuous in his acknowledged writings, no less than in that
extraordinary masterpiece, the annals of tacitus.

notwithstanding that the period in which he flourished was
remarkable for its number of men, who, by their genius and
learning revived the golden ages of ancient literature, he was
admitted by all to be without his equal, be it in erudition or
intellect, power of writing or intimacy with latin. guarino of
verona, in spite of the severity with which he was treated by him
in his controversies, likens him, in one of his epistles (ep.
egreg. viro poggio flor. 26 maji 1455), to "the purest models of
antiquity," and commends him for his "vigorous eloquence and
encyclopaedic stores of information": "pristini socculi floret, et
viget eloquentia, virtutisque thesaurus." another of the best
spirits of that age, benedotto accolti of arezzo, in his work on
the eminent men of his time, puts him on a level with, if not
superior to any of the ancient historians, livy and sallust alone
excepted; for he says, "some of whom" (he is speaking, along with
bracciolini, of bruni, marsuppini, guarino, rossi, manetti, and
traversari) "so wrote history, that, with the exception of livy
and sallust, there were none of the ancients to whom they might
not justly be considered as equal or superior"--"quorum aliqui ita
historias conscripserunt, ut livio et sallustio exceptis, nulli
veterum sint, quibus illi non pares aut superiores fuisse recte
existimentur" (benedict. accoltus arez. in dial. de praest. viris
sui aevi. muratori. t. xx. p. 179). l'enfant does not make this
exception, for, speaking of bracciolini's history of florence, he
says, that in "reading it one is reminded of livy, sallust and the
best historians of antiquity":--"a legard de son histoire, on ne
sauroit le lire sans y reconnoitre tite live, salluste, et les
meilleurs historiens de l'antiquite" (poggiana, vol. ii. p. 83).
sismondi, too, in the opening pages of the 8th volume of his
"histoire des republiques italiennes du moyen age," says in a
footnote (p. 5) that bracciolini, in common with leonardo bruni
and coluccio salutati carried off the palm as a latin writer from
all his predecessors in the fourteenth century:--"a la fin du
siecle on vit paroitre leonardo bruni, dit d'aretin, poggio
bracciolini, et coluccio salutati, qui devoient l'emporter, comme
ecrivains latins, sur tous leurs predecesseurs." although sismondi
is quite right as to the date when bruni and salutati flourished,
he is altogether wrong in supposing that bracciolini made an
appearance before the public at any time in the fourteenth
century; quite at the end of it he was only in his twentieth year:
the next century had well advanced towards the close of its first
quarter before (with the exception of some epistles) he began to
write, which was not until after he had passed his fortieth year.

along with these superior merits of an intellectual writer thus
freely accorded to him by some of his more distinguished
contemporaries and by illustrious historians, bracciolini
possessed the plastic power that makes the forger. he wrote in a
great variety of styles and manners; sometimes treating subjects
with condensation, and sometimes with diffusiveness. his language
is elevated and his sentences are rounded and smooth in his
funeral orations, in which there is no inflation, nothing
declamatory, a perfect absence of straining after effect, yet a
rising with ease into veins of sublime rhetoric, while he is
close, severe and antique:--hence the principal position that is
given to him as an orator by porcellio in a poem where marsuppini
is called upon to chaunt the praises of ciriano of ancona (see
tiraboschi, vi. 286): in ascribing to marsuppini the place of
honour, porcellio leaves others who are inferior in verse-making
to follow; such as, he says, "_the_ orator poggio, the
sublime vegio, and flavio, the historian":--

    tuque, aretine, prior, qui cantas laude poetam,
    karole, sic jubeo, sit tibi primus honos.
    post alii subeant: orator poggius ille,
    vegius altiloquus, flavius historicus.

then it would seem that, as vegio and biondo flavio were, in the
opinion of porcellio, unsurpassed, the first, for the sublimity of
his diction, and the second, by his historical writing, so
bracciolini was lifted by his oratory above all his
contemporaries. wit, polish, and keen sarcasm, with abundance of
acute observations on the human character, distinguish his essay
on hypocrisy, published at cologne in 1535 by orthuinus gratius
daventriensis in his "fasciculus rerum expetendarum et
fugiendarum." his letters are written in an easy, agreeable style,
with constant sportiveness and endless felicity of expression. in
his dialogues he is delicate, lively, and careful. facility and
happiness of diction are conspicuous in his "description of the
ruins of the city of rome," along with accuracy and
picturesqueness in representation of objects. but whatever he did,
all his writings (including the annals), bear the stamp of one
mind: they indicate alike the predominance of three powers
exercised in an equal and uncommon degree, and without which no
one can stand, as he does, on the loftiest pedestal of literary
merit,--sensibility, imagination and judgment, working together
like one compact, indivisible faculty.

in addition to this versatility in composition, which enabled him
to imitate any writer, his career fitted him for the production of
the annals by instilling into his mind the peculiar principles of
morals and behaviour which find apt illustration in that work. no
one could have written that book who had not been admitted within
the veil which hides the daily transactions of the great from the
profane eyes of the vulgar; and who had not come into frequent
personal contact with courts that were corrupt, and with princes,
ministers and leading men of society who were objects of
unqualified abhorrence.

iii. young bracciolini who as the son of a notary of florence in
embarrassed circumstances, inherited no advantages of rank or
fortune, when he had attained, at the age of 23, a competent
knowledge of the learned languages under the instruction of
malpaghino, chrysolaras [endnote 136] and a jewish rabbi, made his
first entry into life by receiving admission, perhaps,--it being
the common custom in the fifteenth century,--by purchase, into the
pontifical chancery as a writer of the apostolic letters. at that
early age the scene that opened itself to his eyes was calculated
to destroy all faith in the goodness of human nature. he found in
the occupant of st. peter's chair, in boniface ix., a man,
ambitious, avaricious, insincere in his dealings, and guilty of
the most flagrant simony, bestowing all church preferments upon
the best bidder, without regard to merit or learning, and making
it his study to enrich his family and relations.

bracciolini did not come into the closest communion with the popes
till he became their principal secretary, which was when he was
between forty and fifty years of age, aeneas sylvius piccolomini,
afterwards pius ii., stating in the 54th chapter of his history of
europe that he "dictated" (or caused to be written) "the
pontifical letters during the time of three popes";-"poggium ...
qui secretarius apostolicas tribus quondam romanis pontificibus
dictarat epistolas";--and though aeneas sylvius does not mention
the names of the pontiffs, he must have meant martin v. (1417),
eugenius iv. (1431) and nicholas v. (1447). nevertheless, as one
of the writers of the apostolic letters, bracciolini was in a
position to have seen a great deal that left a lasting impression
on his mind of the wickedness of a corrupt court, the papal one at
this period being thus described by leonardo bruni, to francis,
lord of cortona:--"full of ill-designing people, too apt to
suspect others of crimes, which they themselves would not scruple
to commit, and some, out of love for calumny, taking delight in
spreading reports, which they themselves did not credit"; so that
when innocent vii. died suddenly of apoplexy, the rumour gained
belief that he had been poisoned, a violent death seeming quite a
natural end to a life of leniency to murder.

not one star of light shone across the long and dreary gloom of
the papal court experiences of bracciolini. on the deposition of
gregory xii. for that pope's duplicity and share in the intrigues
and dissensions which disgraced the pontifical palace for three
years, bracciolini seems to have retired from rome, and to have
remained a resident in florence during the greater part of the ten
months' reign of the mild, pious and philosophical alexander v.,
the only able and virtuous divine, who sat in those dark times on
st. peter's throne.

iv. for losing that one glimpse of light in public life,
bracciolini was more than compensated by a beam of beneficent
fortune in his private career, which threw such lustre on his
path, that it rescued him from what must have been his inevitable
fate, morbid cynicism: it was one of the happiest incidents that
ever occurred to him:--he formed the acquaintance of a man,
seventeen years his senior--who, in the lapse of a very short
time, became to him a father and adviser, to whom present or
absent he imparted every one of his schemes, thoughts, cares,
sayings and doings; who was the unfailing allayer of his
anxieties, alleviator of his sorrows, and most constant support of
all his undertakings,--niccolo niccoli,--of whom i must take
notice, as he was one of the most active stimulators of the
forgery of the annals.

though by no means affluent, and frequently straitened in
circumstances ("homo nequaquam opulens, et rerum persaepe inops,"
says bracciolini of him, or. fun. iii.), nevertheless, he made
enough money, as well as possessed the munificent spirit to build
at his own expense, and present to the convent of the holy spirit
in florence an edifice in which to deposit the books bequeathed to
the brothers by boccaccio; and, at his death, he left to the
public in the same city his own manuscripts, which he had
accumulated at great cost and with much pains. he was one of the
few laymen, not to be found out of italy, who had learning and a
knowledge of latin, which he had acquired with that eminent
scholar, philosopher and theologian, about half a dozen of whose
works have come down to us, ludovicus marsilius; but learning and
latin were essential to the carrying on of his very pleasant and
most lucrative occupation;--that of amending and collating
manuscripts previous to their disposal for coin; a business, in
which, we are told by bracciolini, that he surpassed everybody in
excessive expertness ("solertissimus omnium fuit in emendis ac
comparandis libris fructuosissima ac pulcherrima omnium
negotiatione," or. in fun. nic. nic.); we can, consequently,
conceive what immense sums he must have received for manuscripts
of the best ancient greek and roman classics, when properly spelt,
correctly punctuated, and freed from errors.

his qualities, as enumerated by his friend, bracciolini, in a most
enthusiastic funeral oration over his remains (pog. op. 273-4),
were such as to show, if there be no exaggeration in the
description of him, that he was as much a wonder as any of the
great oracles of his age. his attainments were varied; his
information extensive; his judgment sound, and to be relied upon,
being given not for the mere sake of assent nor for flattery, but
for what he believed to be true; "he got into a considerable
sweat," says bracciolini, "when he read greek," ("in graecis
literis plurimum insudavit"), but was enabled to range over every
department of literature in latin, of which his knowledge was
critical and most masterly, for the same authority assures us "not
a word could be mentioned, the force and etymology of which he did
not know"--"nullum proferebatur verbum cujus vim et originem
ignoraret" in geography he stood without a rival; for, his memory,
being like a vice, retaining everything he read, even to names, he
knew the minutiae, of every country better than those who had been
residents in them; though he rarely practised the art, he was a
master of rhetoric; as a conversationist he held his company in
entranced silence from the wisdom of his remarks, the dulcet flow
of his words, and his transcendent memory bringing together from
all quarters, with appropriateness to every subject under
discussion, the valuable stock of his miscellaneous reading.
nothing could be more natural than that such a wonderful instance
of the human intellect should court the congenial society of
lovers of learning; he made his house the resort for them; and he
placed at the disposal of the studious his library, which was the
best in florence, now that salutati's, after his death, had been
disposed of by his sons at auction.

bracciolini was so struck by the attainments and captivated by the
character of this man, that an acquaintance casually formed
speedily ripened into an intimacy of the most confidential,
cordial and communicative kind. bracciolini, during his stay in
florence, was a guest in the house of niccoli; and there, for
nearly a year, he resumed and pursued his studies with ardour amid
the rich stores of the large and select assortment of manuscripts,
amounting to not far from a thousand in number. he was thus adding
to the treasures of his lore with daily assiduity, when the news
reached florence that cardinal cossa had (notwithstanding the
well-known virtues of alexander v.) poisoned his predecessor, and
had been elected to the pontifical chair by the title of john xxiii.

behold bracciolini once more in the palace of the pontiffs of
rome; and now acting, in the capacity of secretary, or, more
properly, writer of the apostolic letters, to a pope who was a
poisoner. john xxiii. was even worse than that: he was a most
atrocious violator of laws, human and divine; and some crimes he
committed were so heinous that it would be indecent to place them
before the public. one can imagine how agreeable must have been
the occupation to that pope of a military rather than an
ecclesiastic turn, and fonder of deeds of violence and bloodshed
than of acts of meekness and christianity, when he was presiding
at constance over that general council, which sent to the stake
those bohemian followers of the morning star of the reformation,
huss and jerome of prague, to be burnt alive, according to general
belief, with their clothes and everything about them, even to
their purses and the money in them, and their ashes to be thrown
into the rhine; but, as will be immediately seen, from the account
of an eye-witness, in a state of perfect nudity.

v. bracciolini, who witnessed the burning of jerome of prague,
gives a description of it in one of his epistles, in a manner
equal to anything that may be found in the annals;--indeed, many
of his contemporaries thought that his epistles reflected the
style and spirit of antiquity,--beccadelli of bologna, for
example, who says, writing to bracciolini: "your epistles, which,
in my opinion, reflect the very spirit of the ancients, and,
especially, the antique style of roman expression":--"epistolae
tuae, quae veterum sane, et antiquum illum eloquentiae romanae
morem, prae ceteris, mea sententia exprimunt" (at the end of lusus
ad vencrem, p. 47). the style is simpler, more unambitious, and
more flowing and smooth than is usually found in the annals; but,
(as in the descriptive passages in that work), free play is given
to the fancy which works unclogged by verboseness; and judgment
marks the circumstances in a description which progresses,
apparently without art, to the close of the beautiful climax, and
strongly moves the compassion of the reader:--"when he persisted
with increased contumacy in his errors, he was condemned of heresy
by the council, and sentenced to be burnt alive. with an unruffled
brow and cheerful countenance he went to his end; he was unawed by
fire, or any kind of torture, or death. never did any stoic suffer
death with a soul of so much fortitude and courage, as he seemed
to meet it. when he came to the place of death, he stripped
himself of his clothes, then dropping on his bended knees clasped
the stake to which he was to be fastened: he was first bound naked
to the stake with wet ropes, and then with a chain, after which
not small, but large logs of wood with sticks thrown in among them
were piled around him up to his breast; then when they were being
set on fire he began to sing a sort of hymn, which the smoke and
the flames hardly put a stop to. this was the greatest mark of his
soul of fortitude: when the executioner wanted to light the fire
behind his back, so that he should not see it, he called out,
'come here, and set fire to it before my eyes; for if i had been
afraid of it, i never should have come to this place, which it was
in my power to have avoided.' thus did this man, perish, who was
excellent in everything but faith. i saw the end of him; i watched
every scene of it. whether he acted from conviction or contumacy,
you would have pronounced his the death of a man who belonged to
the school of philosophy. i have laid before you a long narrative
for the sake of occupation; having nothing to do i wanted to do
something, and give an account of things very different, indeed,
from the stories of the ancients; for the famous mutius did not
suffer his arm to be burnt with a soul so bold, as this man his
whole body; nor socrates drink poison half so willingly as he
endured burning."

i shall now place the passage before the reader in the latin, as
it was written by bracciolini, with some words in italics, upon
which i shall afterwards comment:--

"_cum pertinacius_ in erroribus perseveraret, per concilium
haeresis damnatus est, et _igni_ combustus. jucunda fronte et
alacri vultu ad _exitum_ suum _accessit_, non _ignem_ expavit,
non tormenti genus, non _mortis_. nullus unquam stoicorum fuit
_tam constanti animo, tam_ forti _mortem_ perpessus, quam iste
_oppetiisse_ videtur. _cum_ venisset ad _locum mortis, se ipsum
exuit vestimentis, tum_ procumbens, flexis genibus, veneratus est
_palum_, ad quem ligatus fuit: primum funibus manentibus, _tum_
catena undus ad _palum_ constrictus fuit; ligna deinde circumposita
pectore tenus non minuscula, sed grossa palaeis interjectis,
_tum_ flamma adhibita canere coepit hymnum quendam, quem fumus
et _ignis_ vix interrupit. hoc maximum _constantis animi_ signum:
_cum_ lector _ignem_ post tergum, ne id _videret_, injicere vellet:
--'huc,' inquit, '_accede_, atque in conspectu accende _ignem_;
si enim illum timuissem, nunquam ad hunc _locum_ quem effugiendi
facultus erat, _accessissem_.' hoc modo vir, praeter fidem,
egregius, consumptus est. _vidi_ hunc _exitum_, singulos _actus_
inspexi. sive perfidia, sive _pertinacia_ id _egerit_, certe
philosophiae schola interitum _viri_ descripsisses. longam tibi
cantilenam _narravi_ ocii causa, nihil _agens_ aliquid _agere_
volui, et res tibi _narrare_ paulum similes histories priscorum.
nam neque mutius ille _tam_ fidenti _animo_ passus est membrum
uri, quam iste universum corpus; neque socrates _tam_ sponte
venenum bibit, quam iste _ignem_ suscepit." [endnote 145]

it will be seen, as a peculiarity in composition, that, in this
not very long sentence, several words are re-introduced, and
sometimes over and over again, when the repetition could have been
avoided, as: "accedere," "agere," "videre," "narrare," "pertinacia,"
"constans," "animus," "mors," "exitus," "ignis," "vir," "locus,"
"palus," "cum," "tum," "tam," &c. as this runs through the whole
of bracciolini's compositions with much frequency, it is to be
expected that it would be found to some extent in the annals;
because a man who so writes, writes thus unconsciously and
unavoidably, and even when engaged in a forgery, striving to
imitate the style and manner of another, he could not escape
from so marked and distinctive a mannerism. bracciolini,
accordingly, is found adhering in the annals to this uniformity of
manner: many passages more forcibly illustrative of this
peculiarity might be quoted; but i select the sham sea-fight in
the xiith book, for two reasons, because it is pretty much of the
same length as the burning of jerome of prague, and because it is
of a similar nature,--descriptive:--

"sub idem _tempus_, inter _lacum_ fucinum amnemque lirin perrupto
monte, quo magnificentia _operis_ a pluribus _viseretur, lacu_ in
ipso navale _proelium_ adornatur; ut quondam augustus, structo cis
tiberim stagno, sed levibus navigiis et minore copia _ediderat._
claudius triremes quadriremesque et undeviginti hominum millia
armavit, cincto _ratibus_ ambitu, ne vaga effugia forent; _ac_
tamen spatium amplexus, ad _vim_ remigii, gubernantium artes,
impetus _navium_, et _proelio_ solita. in _ratibus_ praetoriarum
cohortium manipuli turmaeque adstiterant, antepositis propugnaculis,
ex quis catapultae ballistaeque tenderentur: reliqua _lacus_
classiarii tectis _navibus_ obtinebant. ripas et colles, _ac_
montium _edita_, in modum theatri _multitudo_ innumera complevit
_proximis_ e municipiis, et alii urbe ex ipsa, _visendi cupidine_
aut officio in _principem_. ipse insigni paludamento, neque procul
agrippina chlamyde aurata, praesedere. _pugnatum_, quamquam inter
sontes, fortium virorum animo; _ac_, post multum vulnerum, occidioni
exempti sunt. sed perfecto _spectaculo_ apertum _aquarum_ iter.
incuria _operis_ manifesta fuit, haud satis depressi ad _lacus_
ima vel media. eoque, _tempore_ interjecto, altius effossi specus,
et contrahendae rursus _multitudini_ gladiatorum _spectaculum editur_,
inditis pontibus pedestrem ad _pugnam_. quin et convivium effluvio
_lacus_ adpositum, magna formidine cunctos adfecit; quia _vis aquarum_
prorumpens _proxima_ trahebat, convulsis ulterioribus, aut fragore
et sonitu exterritis. simul agrippina, trepidatione _principis_ usa,
ministrum _operis_ narcissum incusat _cupidinis ac_ praedarum. nec
ille reticet, impotentiam muliebrem nimiasque spes ejus arguens."
(an. xii. 56-7).

in this passage it will be observed that the same thing takes place
in the repetition of words:--"lacus," "ratis," "vis," "navis," "ac,"
"multitudo," "cupido," "princeps," "tempus," "spectaculum," "edere,"
"proelium," "visere," "proximus," "aqua," "opus" and "pugna." the
conjunctive particle "ac," is more particularly to be noted as an
out of the way word for the ordinary copulative "et": "_ac_ tamen
spatium amplexus"; "_ac_ montium edita"; "_ac_ post multum vulnerum,"
occurring so frequently in such a brief sentence is just like the
monotony of composition in the extract from bracciolini with respect
to "cum": "_cum_ pertinacius in erroribus perseveraret"; "_cum_
venisset ad locum mortis"; "_cum_ lictor ignem post tergum," &c.

but this is not all as to the resemblance which the passage from
bracciolini bears to the writing in the annals. the expression
"quam iste _oppetiise_," i.e. mortem, "videtur," has its
exact counterpart in the second book of the annals in the phrase:
"vix cohibuere amici, quo minus eodem mari _oppeteret_," i.e.
mortem (ii. 24). when, too, bracciolini says of jerome of prague,
"_se ipsum exuit_ vestimentis," "_strips himself_ of his clothes,"
instead of simply, "takes off his clothes,"--"exuit vestimenta,"--
we have an expression precisely like that in the annals, "_neutrum_
datis a se praemiis _exuit_," that is, "_strips neither_ of the
rewards which he had given him" (xiv. 55), instead of "takes away
the rewards,"--"praemia exuit."

but i will go by-and-bye more fully into matters of this kind. at
present it is necessary that i should still pursue the career of
bracciolini,--or rather so much of it as is absolutely needed, in
order that the reader may see how curiously it prepared and formed
him to be the author of such a peculiar work as the annals, which
in its characteristic singularity, could have proceeded from him
only, and by no manner of means from tacitus.




chapter ii.

bracciolini in london.


gaining insight into the darkest passions from associating with
cardinal beaufort.--ii. his passage about london in the fourteenth
book of the annals examined.--and iii. about the parliament of
england in the fourth book.

i. in the autumn of 1418, after the breaking up of the council of
constance, bracciolini left italy and accompanied to england a
member of the plantagenet family, the second son of john of gaunt,
duke of lancaster, henry beaufort, whose placid and beardless face
the great florentine seems to have first seen at the ecumenical
council which that princely prelate had turned aside to visit in
the course of a pilgrimage he was making to jerusalem. henry
beaufort was then bishop of winchester, but afterwards a cardinal,
and though there was another prince of the roman church, kemp,
archbishop of york and subsequently of canterbury, beaufort was
always styled by the popular voice and in public acts "the
cardinal of england," on account, perhaps, of his royal parentage
and large wealth, more enormous than had been known since the days
of the de spencers: he had lands in manors, farms, chaces, parks
and warrens in seven counties, berkshire, buckinghamshire,
oxfordshire, wiltshire, somersetshire, hampshire and surrey,
besides having the customs of england mortgaged to him, and the
cocket of the port of southampton with its dependencies,--an
indebtedness of the state which is so far interesting as being the
foundation of our national debt.

bracciolini had now an opportunity of watching and unravelling the
wiles of this august prelate and patron of his; he thus gained
still more insight into the ways of the worldly and the feelings
of the ambitious; acquired a masterly knowledge of the dark
passions and became versed in the crooked policy of court
intrigue. he had quitted provinces at home laid waste by hostile
invasions and cities agitated by the discord of contending
parties; genoa sending warships to ravage in the mediterranean,
venice reducing to subjection the smaller states along the
adriatic, and florence warring with pisa, still to fix his eyes on
darkness and the degradation of humanity; for he was visiting a
country,--as england was in the fifteenth century,--buried in the
gloom of barbarism, and forlorn in its literary condition, with
writers, unworthy the name of scholars, walsingham and
whethamstede, otterbourne and elmham, inditing bald chronicles;
students applying their minds to scholastic philosophy; divines
confounding their wits with theological mysteries; and men with
inclinations to science, as thomas northfield, losing themselves
in witchcraft, divination and the barbarous jargon of astrology,
while rendering themselves, at any moment, liable to be
apprehended by order of the doctors and notaries who formed the
board of commissioners for the discovery of magicians, enchanters
and sorcerers; for it was the age when invention framed the lie of
the day, the marvellous military leadership of joan of arc, and
credulity stood as ready to receive it as little boys in nurseries
the wondrous tale of jack and the beanstalk. through this mist the
figure of cardinal beaufort loomed largest, unsociable,
disdainful, avaricious, immeasurably high-stomached (for he deemed
himself on an equality with the king); and, in spite of immoderate
riches, inordinately mean: along with these unamiable qualities,
he upheld the policy of martin v., which was to destroy the
independence of the national church of england: he was treacherous
to his associates, and murderous thoughts were not strangers to
his bosom.

bishop milner, in his history of winchester under the plantagenets
(vol. i. p. 301), denies that there is solid ground in history for
representing beaufort as depraved, and condemns shakespeare for
having endowed humphry, duke of gloucester, with merit of which he
deprived the memory of cardinal beaufort. the late dean hook, too,
in his elegantly written life of archbishop chicheley (p. 97) is
of opinion that beaufort "has appeared in history with his
character drawn in darker colours than it deserves." those two
distinguished dignitaries, one of the roman catholic and the other
of the english church, do not then seem to have heard of the
anecdote related by agnes strickland, in her life of katherine of
valois (p. 114), that henry v., when prince of wales, was narrowly
saved from murder by the fidelity of his little spaniel, whose
restlessness caused the discovery of a man who was concealed
behind the arras near the bed where the prince was sleeping in the
green chamber in the palace at westminster, and a dagger being
found on the person of the intruder, he confessed that he was
there by the order of beaufort to kill the prince in the night,
showing that the cardinal was guilty of a double treachery, for he
was setting on the heir-apparent at the time to seize his father's
crown; nor do milner and hook seem to have known that the death of
the duke of gloucester was principally contrived by wykeham's
successor in the see of winchester, and that, whether poisoned or
not, the duke was hurried out of the world in a very suspicious
manner, one of the first acts of margaret of anjou after her
coronation being, in conjunction with the wintonian diocesan to
bring about the death of that prince after arresting him in a
parliament called for the purpose at st. edmund's bury;
shakespeare, accordingly, had historic truth with him, when he
represented the cardinal suffering on his death-bed the tortures
of a murderer's guilty conscience, from being implicated in taking
away by violence the life of humphry, duke of gloucester:--

    "alive again! then show me where he is,
    i'll give a thousand pound to look upon him.
    he hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
    comb down his hair. look, look! it stands upright
    like lime twigs set to catch my winged soul.
    give me some drink; and bid the apothecary
    bring the strong poison that i bought of him":--

to which a looker-on observes:--

    "o! thou eternal mover of the heavens,
    look with a gentle eye upon this wretch."

it could have been with no gentle eye that bracciolini looked on
cardinal beaufort, whose "bad death," as shakespeare makes the
earl of warwick observe, "argued a monstrous life."

repeatedly in letters to his friend niccoli, during two years and
more of anxiety and discontent passed by him from 1420 to 1422 in
the palace of the prince prelate, bracciolini complained bitterly
of the magnificent promises not being fulfilled that the cardinal
had held forth to him on condition of his accompanying him to
england. in vain he looked forward to considerable emolument; day
after day he found himself doomed to the common lot of those who
depend on the patronage of the great;--"in suing long to bide":--

    "to lose good days that might be better spent;
    to waste long nights in pensive discontent;
    to speed to-day, to be put back to-morrow;
    to feed on hope; to pine on fear and sorrow;
    to fret the soul with crosses and with cares;
    to eat the heart through comfortless despairs;
    to fawn, to crouch, to wait, to ride, to run,
    to spend, to give, to want, to be undone."

and, really, bracciolini may be said to have been "undone"; for
when he got what he had bargained to purchase, the frivolous
goodwill of his master, it was, as he expressed it, "the birth of
the mouse after the labour of the mountain": he obtained a
benefice of 120 florins a year, with what he did not anticipate
would be attached to it,--hard work.

in order to have a precise and not a vague and confused idea of
the galling effect produced on his feelings by this offer, it is
necessary to turn to two paragraphs (37, 38), in the second book
of the annals;--for i cannot divest myself of the suspicion that
this incident in his life is there indirectly referred to, where
an account is given that has no historical basis of the "nobilis
juvenis, in paupertate manifesta," marcus hortalus, whose noble
parentage and straightened circumstances closely corresponded to
the birth and means of bracciolini. when seeking recompense from
tiberius for his four sons, he calls on the emperor to behold in
them "the scions and offspring of what a multitude of consuls!
what a multitude of dictators! which he says not to mortify, but
to excite commiseration."--"en! stirps et progenies tot consulum!
tot dictatorum! nec ad invidiam ista, sed conciliandae
misericordiae refero;" commenting on which justus lipsius bursts
into the angry exclamation: "what a braggart, lying speech on this
man's part! for where was this multitude of consuls, this
multitude of dictators? why, i can find only one dictator and one
consul in the hortensian family; the dictator in the year of rome,
467, when the commons revolted; and the consul, quintus
hortensius, the grandfather of the speaker,--who, perhaps,
however, reckoned in the ancestors also in his mother's line":
--"vaniloqua hominis oratio et falsa! ubi enim isti tot consules,
tot dictatores? certe ego in hortensia gente unum, dictatorem
reperio, et consulem unum; dictatorem anno urbis 467 secessione
plebis; consulem, q. hortensium hujus avum. sed intellegit
fortasse majores suos etiam ex gente materna."

lipsius would have spared himself the trouble of inditing this
indignant note and throwing out this useless suggestion had he
known that bracciolini forged the annals, and playfully
interspersed his fabrication occasionally with fanciful characters
and fictitious events. the picture of marcus hortalus, who had
received from augustus the munificent gift of a million sesterces,
being in the days of tiberius once more poor, married, with
children, and seeking aid from the state for his four sons, seems
to be all purely imaginary, introduced merely as a photograph from
life, the feelings and conduct of hortalus, after the treatment of
his sons by tiberius, being such a faithful reflex, as far as can
be judged from his own confessions, of the feelings and conduct of
bracciolini himself after the way in which his hopes of preferment
were blasted by cardinal beaufort. just as hortalus, if he had
been left to himself, would have remained a bachelor, and only
from pressure on the part of augustus, became a husband, and,
while incapable of supporting children, a father, so bracciolini
would have remained in italy and never visited this country, had
it not been for the importunities of the cardinal, and never
turned his thoughts to preferment in the church, which he is
invariably telling us he disliked, had not beaufort given
assurance that he would put him in the way of holding some high
and lucrative post in england; and then when he received a paltry
benefice, instead of expressing thanks like the other dependents
on the prince prelate, he was silent, from fear of the power
possessed by beaufort, or from retaining even in his contracted
fortunes the politeness which he had inherited from his noble
forefathers:--"egere alii grates; siluit hortalus, pavore, an
avitae nobilitatis, etiam inter angustias fortunae, retinens"
(an. ii. 38).

ii. we are indebted to bracciolini's stay among us for one or two
matters that are interesting about our country. his two years'
residence here filled him with a marked admiration of london as
well as with the most confused ideas of the antiquity and
greatness of its commerce; and though comments have already been
made on his description of it as eminently absurd, the passage is
too curious not to be examined again; the more so as it has misled
good historians of london, who believing that the account actually
proceeded from tacitus, have taken it to be incontrovertibly true,
whereas it is only true, if it be applied, as it is applicable
only to the advanced state of society and the large commercial
town of which bracciolini was the eye witness towards the close of
the reign of henry v., and the commencement of that of his infant
son and successor. the slightest investigation will carry
conviction of this.

a hundred years before the birth of tacitus, britain was so
monstrously barbarous and obscure, that julius caesar, when
wanting to invade it and wishing for information of its state and
circumstances, could not gain that knowledge, because, as he tells
us, "scarcely anybody but merchants visited britain in those
times, and no part of it, except the seacoast and the provinces
opposite gaul": ("neque enim temere praeter mercatores illo adiit
quisquam, neque iis ipsis quidquam, praeter oram maritimam, atque
eas regiones, quae sunt contra gallias." (caesar de bell. gall. iv. 20).
from this we see that, in the middle of the century before the
christian era, the only trade with britain was then confined
to the shores, and the southern parts, from kent to cornwall: it
is then, against every probability that, in a period extending
over no more than about a hundred years, this trade should have
extended up the navigable rivers and have reached london enough
for it to have risen up, by the year 60 of our era, into an
immense emporium and be known all over the world for its enormous
commerce. that this was not the case we know from strabo, who
lived in the time of augustus, and who, though saying a great deal
about our island and its trade, has not a word about london,
howbeit that the author of the annals does record in his work that
it was exceedingly famous for the number of the merchants who
frequented it and the extent of its commerce; but it is not likely
that it was so, if the whole island did no more trade than strabo
informs us, the articles exported from all britain being
insignificant and few;--corn and cattle; such metals as gold,
silver, tin, lead and iron; slaves and hunting dogs (strabo iii.
2. 9.--ib. 5. 11.--iv. 5. 2), which oppian says were beagles.
musgrave, in his belgicum britannicum adds "cheese," from some
wretched authority, for strabo says that the natives at that time
were as ignorant of the art of making cheese, as of gardening and
every kind of husbandry:--[greek: "mae turopoiein dia taen apeirian,
apeirous d'einai kai kaepeias kai allon georgikon."] (iv. 5. 2).

the statement, then, that london had the very greatest reputation
for the number of its merchants and commodities of trade in nero's
time is utterly unfounded--nothing more nor less than outrageously
absurd; the picture, however, is quite true if london be considered
at the time when bracciolini was here. its merchants then carried
on a considerable trade with a number of foreign countries, to
an extent far greater, and protected by commercial treaties much
more numerous than previous to investigation i could have been
led to suppose. the foreign merchants who principally came to the
port of london were those of majorca, sicily, and the other islands
in the mediterranean; the western parts of morocco; venice, genoa,
florence and the other cities of italy; spain and portugal; the
subjects of the duke of brabant, lorraine and luxemburgh; of the
duke of brittany, and of the duke of holland, zealand, hanneau
and friesland; the traders of the great manufacturing towns of
flanders; of the hanse towns of germany, 64 in number, situated
on the shores of the baltic, the banks of the rhine, and the other
navigable rivers of germany; the people of the great seaport towns
of prussia and livonia, then subject to the grand master of the
teutonic order of knights, along with the traders of sweden,
denmark, norway and iceland.

in addition to these bringing their goods here in their own
bottoms, a great number of other foreign merchants were
established in london for managing the trade of their respective
states and cities, performing, in fact, the duties now attached to
the office of consul, first instituted by the maligned but
enlightened richard iii. these foreign merchants being as powerful
as they were numerous, formed themselves into companies:
independently of the german merchants of the steel yard, there
were the companies of the lombards; the caursini of rome; the
peruchi, scaldi, friscobaldi and bardi of florence, and the
ballardi and reisardi of lucca. the government protected them,
and, as they were viewed with intense jealousy by the native
traders, they were judged, in all disputes, not by the common law,
but the merchant law, which was administered by the mayor and
constables; and of the mediators in these disputes, two only were
native, four being foreigners, two germans and two italians.

the londoners had made prodigious advances upon their forefathers
in the commodities of merchandize in which they dealt. their most
valuable articles of exportation were wool and woollen clothes in
great varieties and great quantity; corn; metals, particularly
lead and tin; herrings from yarmouth and norfolk; salmon, salt,
cheese, honey, wax, tallow, and several articles of smaller value.
but their great trade was in foreign imports and that was entirely
in the hands of foreign merchants who came here in shoals,
bringing with them their gold and silver, in coin and bullion;
different kinds of wines from the finest provinces in the south of
france, and from spain and portugal; also from the two last
countries (to enter into a nomenclature that's like the catalogue
of an auctioneer for monotony of names and unconnectedness of
things), figs, raisins, dates, oils, soap, wax, wool, liquorice,
iron, wadmote, goat-fell, red-fell, saffron and quicksilver; wine,
salt, linen and canvas from brittany; corn, hemp, flax, tar,
pitch, wax, osmond, iron, steel, copper, pelfry, thread, fustian,
buckram, canvas, boards, bow-staves and wool-cards from germany
and prussia; coffee, silk, oil, woad, black pepper, rock alum,
gold and cloth of gold from genoa; spices of all kinds, sweet
wines and grocery wares, sugar and drugs, from venice, florence
and the other italian states; gold and other precious stones from
egypt and arabia; oil of palm from the countries about babylon;
frankincense from arabia; spiceries, drugs, aromatics of various
kinds, silks and other fine fabrics from turkey, india and other
oriental lands; silks from the manufactories established in
sicily, spain, majorca and ivica; linen and woollen cloths of the
finest texture and the most delicate colours from the looms of
flanders for the use of persons of high rank; the tapestries of
arras; and furs of various kinds and in great quantities from
russia, norway and other northern countries. the native merchants
of london, the anglo-saxons and anglo-normans, carried on an
enormous inland trade. they supplied all parts of the kingdom with
corn from the many granaries which filled the city of london.
there was a constant buying and selling of live horned cattle and
sheep. trade was great among goldsmiths, jewellers, gilders,
embroiderers, illuminators and painters; and makers of all kinds
of commodities sent their goods from every part of the provinces,
knowing that they were wanted and would meet with immediate
purchasers.

if those were the days when florence had its cosmo de' medici, who
spent millions of florins in building palaces, churches and
charitable foundations to beautify his native town; and when
bourges had its jean coeur who was rich enough to furnish lewis
vii. with sufficient gold crowns to support the armies with which
that monarch recovered his possessions from the english, london,
too, had its hende, whittington and norbury affluent and
magnificent enough to lend their sovereign immense sums of money,
and adorn the city in which they had amassed their stupendous
fortunes with useful and ornamental buildings--bridewells,
colleges, hospitals, guildhalls and public libraries. well might
bracciolini, without the slightest particle of exaggeration, say
of london, as he saw it, that it was "copia negotiatorum et
commeatuum maxime celebre" (an. xiv. 33).

in leaving this passage i cannot help remarking that the
expression, "copia negotiatorum et commeatuum," has a turn that is
frequently found in the annals; it is a cast of phrase not
affected by tacitus; but it is exactly the manner of arranging
words in a sentence to which sallust is partial: "frequentiam
negotiatorum et commeatuum," he says in his "jugurtha" (47); it is
obvious that in this passage sallust means by "commeatuus,"
"supplies of corn and provisions," as it is equally obvious that
bracciolini (though following the phraseology of his favourite
latin author,) gives it, in the sentence quoted from the
fourteenth book of the annals, a wider meaning, "commodities of
merchandize."

iii. if bracciolini erred with respect to london, in magnifying it
into a town of superlative commercial splendour in the days of
nero, which, i repeat, is wildly ridiculous, he more grossly erred
with respect to our form of government; for when he decried it,
and prophesied its decadence and downfall, his sagacity and
judgment were impugned.

when he was here our country was in the infancy of its example as
a land ruled by the most admirable political arrangements. it can
readily be believed with what interest and surprise the proud
italian, who had seen nothing of the kind in his own land of high
civilization, must have witnessed our parliaments regularly
meeting, as had been the case for generations, since the reign of
edward i. in 1293, knights and burgesses popularly elected by the
inhabitants of the counties and boroughs sitting in council with
the king, surrounded by his barons and bishops, priors who were
peers and abbots who had mitres. with an outspoken contempt of
england, and an overweening admiration of italy, he avails himself
of an opportunity of sneering covertly at our harmonious
combination of the three forms of government, the monarchy, the
oligarchy and the republic.

it is scarcely necessary to say that, as reference is made to the
english parliament, the editors of tacitus have all been puzzled
as to the meaning of the phrase, "delecta ex his et consociata,"
in the following passage, where the author of the annals speaks of
"the commonalty, or the aristocracy, or a monarch ruling every
nation and community"; and that "a form of government based on a
selection and conjunction of these is easier praised than
realised; or if it is realized, cannot last":--"cunctas nationes
et urbes populus, aut primores, aut singuli regunt: delecta ex his
et consociata reipublicae forma laudari facilius, quam evenire;
vel si evenit, haud diuturna esse potest" (iv. 33). now the
phrase, "delecta ex his," selected from these, that is, the
monarchy, the oligarchy and the republic, and meaning that the
selections were of all the excellences and none of the faults of
each, is in every way applicable to only one form of government,--
our parliamentary government, which is at once legislative and
executive, and, as it is now, it almost was in the days when
bracciolini was on a visit to us in the opening days of the infant
king, henry vi. then not only was the "populus," or "commonalty,"
represented by knights, citizens and burgesses of their own
choosing; but the "primores," or "aristocracy," had their
representatives also in the larger barons, bishops, priors who
were peers and mitred abbots; priors who were not peers, and
abbots who had not mitres, as well as many of the smaller barons,
not receiving writs of summons: the king himself, being an infant
at the breast, had his representative, the "selection" being from
his own family, in the person of his uncle humphry, duke of
gloucester, who was his substitute in the parliament as the
protector or regent; and even when the king was an adult, and
absent in wars, as edward i. when engaged in the conquest of
wales, he was represented in parliament by commissioners, as our
sovereign is to this day.

but bracciolini not only said that the selections were from the
monarchic, aristocratic and popular elements, but that they were
"associated" or "conjoined"--"consociata." here all the editors of
tacitus by their silence or otherwise fairly admit that the
passage is utterly beyond their comprehension,--"one of those
things," in fact, "which," in the words of lord dundreary, "no
fellow is supposed to understand." as for the word, "consociata,"
james gronovius was of opinion that tacitus must have written
"concinnata"; but not having the boldness, after the fashion of
justus lipsius of making alterations, according to his own sweet
pleasure, without the authority of manuscript or edition, he
followed beroaldi, who, as much puzzled as any of the subsequent
editors, had substituted "constituta" for the nonsensical word in
the blundering ms. "consciata," though common sense should have
told him that "consociata" was meant, it being evident that the
transcriber, infinitely more puzzled than the editors, for he
could not have had the remotest conception of what he was doing,
had merely omitted a vowel in his usual careless way. it was not
till ernesti's time, 1772, that the proper word was restored.
ernesti, too, fancied that he had discovered something in the
roman government, according to the description by polybius, which
justified the language in the annals. "i have no doubt," he says,
"but that tacitus had in his mind (along with other historians)
polybius, who, in the 9th and following chapters of the 6th book
of his history, praises the roman republic for combining the
excellences of all the three forms of government, while avoiding
the faults of each, and he speaks of that system of government as
being alone perfect which is compounded of these three." "neque
dubito, tacitum in animo habuisse cum alios historicos, tum
polybium qui 6. 9 sqq. rempublicam romanam laudat hoc nomine, quod
omnium illarum trium formarum commoda complexa sit, vitatis
singularum vitiis, eamque solam rempublicam perfectam esse dicit,
quae sit e tribus istis temperata."

let us then see exactly what it is that polybius does say. after
speaking of a balance between the three forms of government in the
roman administration being so fine that it was no easy matter to
decide whether the government was aristocratic, democratic or
monarchical (vi. 11), he proceeds to point out the several powers
appropriated to each branch of the constitution;--the apparently
regal rule of the consuls, the aristocratic authority of the
senate, and the share taken by the people in the administration of
affairs (_ibid._ 12, 13, 14). this done, his endeavour is to
show not that there was any "selection and conjunction" as stated
in the annals, of the several forms, but quite on the contrary,
"counteraction and co-operation": to this he devotes an entire
chapter, with these remarks by way of preface:--"with respect,
then, to the several parts into which the government is divided,
the nature of every one of them has been shown; and it now remains
to be pointed out how each of these forms is enabled to counteract
the others, and how, on the other hand, it can co-operate with
them:--[greek: "tina men oun tropon diaergaetai ta taes politeias
eis ekaston eidos, eirgaetai tina de tropon antiprattein
boulaethenta, kai synergein allaelois palin hekasta ton mergan
dunatai, nun phaethaesetai."] (vi. 15.)

after this, it cannot be supposed that reference is made to the
commonwealth of rome. still less so, when, in the very next
sentence the author of the annals attempts to show that an equally
blended administration cannot endure, because of the example
afforded by rome (proving how well he knew that the romans had
mixed together in their government the elements of the three
forms); he says, that when the plebeians had the principal power,
there was submission to the will of the populace; when the
patricians held the sway, the wishes of the aristocratic section
of the community were consulted; and when rome had her emperors,
the people fared no better than during the reign of the kings:
here are his words:--"therefore as in the olden time" (during the
republic), "when the plebeians were paramount, or when the
patricians were superior in power," (in the first instance) "the
whim of the populace was ascertained and the way in which their
humour was to be dealt with, and" (in the second instance) "those
persons were accounted astute in their generation and wise who
made themselves thoroughly conversant with the disposition of the
senate and the aristocracy; then when a change took place in the
government" (from the republic to the empire), "there was the same
state of things as when a king was the ruler":--"igitur, ut olim,
plebe valida, vel cum patres pollerent, noscenda vulgi natura et
quibus modis temperanter haberetur, senatusque et optimatium
ingenia qui maxime perdidicerant, callidi temporum et sapientes
credebantur; sic, converso statu, neque alia rerum quam si unus
imperitet." (l.c.)

what he is striving in his usual dark way to establish is this:--
here was the failure of the roman form of administration; the
romans were the most accomplished people in the art of government;
the english, who are semi-barbarous, can know nothing about
government; it is then idle on their part to imagine that they are
endowed with such a vast amount of political knowledge as to be
qualified by their own reflections alone to build up a new and
magnificent form of government; when, too, that form of government
is essentially different from our superb oligarchies in italy, the
most civilized and cultivated part of the world in everything,
especially politics; the english style of government is, also,
strictly based on the old roman mode of administration, and when
that failed, how can any sensible man deem that the english method
of administration will ever work successfully. hence his remarks:
"raking up and relating this," (namely, how the roman government
never worked well at any time,) "will be of benefit," (to whom?
forsooth, the english,) "because few" (in matters of statesmanship),
"by their own sagacity distinguish the good from the very bad,
the practicable from the pernicious; the many gain their wisdom
from the acts of others; yet as examples bring benefit so do they
meet least with a probation." if that be not the meaning of his
words, then they must remain, as in all translations, without meaning.
yet the latin, crabbed as it is, (and it is always crabbed in the annals),
seems to me to be simple enough:--"haec conquiri tradique in rem fuerit;
quia pauci prudentia honesta ab deterioribus, utilia ab noxiis,
discernunt; plures aliorum eventis docentur; ceterum ut profutura
ita minimum oblectationis adferunt" (l.c.).

that he does not mean the roman form of government is further seen
by his remark that the kind of administration spoken of is "easier
to be commended than _realized_"--"laudari facilius, quam _evenire_";
just as it is easy to see from his language that he has before him
an instance of some government framed like that which he says will
not exist for any length of time; for whenever he employs the
hypothetical particle, "_si_" about anything that is absolute and
beyond doubt, he always uses it with the indicative and not the
conditional. as he then writes, "si _evenit_," (not "si _eveniat_"),
"if it _is_ realized," (not "if it _be_ realized,") he really has
in his mind some state constituted according to his description.

it should now be borne in mind that he was in this country before
he forged the annals, and was in the household of cardinal
beaufort, who had repeatedly filled the office of chancellor, on
whom devolved the duty of issuing the writs to the members of the
parliament, commoners as well as peers; for that great officer the
speaker, was not yet invested with the authority so to do with
respect to the lower house; not only, then, had bracciolini heard
of the english parliament, but the precise nature of it must have
come frequently under his cognizance. in fact, it was no other
than the english parliament to which he refers.

that being accepted, there were several reasons to induce him to
doubt the durability of our parliament: the crown possessed too
great power in those assemblies: it was with difficulty that the
great barons could be got to attend, their delight being to reside
at their castles in the country, and take no part in political
affairs; it was also difficult to get the representatives of the
counties and boroughs to attend, on account of the long distances
that many had to come, and the great expenses of their attendance;
sometimes in a county the properly qualified person,--an actual
knight,--could not be found, and there was no representative from
a county, until upwards of twenty years after bracciolini had left
us, when esquires and gentlemen could be returned; sometimes a
city or borough would not send a member, either by pleading
poverty in not being able to pay the wages of the two
representatives, or from not finding among their townsmen two
burgesses with the qualifications required by the writ, that is,
sufficiently hale to bear the fatigue of the journey, and
sufficiently sensible to discharge the duties of close attendance
on parliament; for every member was then required to be present at
the parliament; hence each small freeholder from a county and each
burgess had to find three or four persons of credit to be sureties
for him that he would attend; and the constituents of each were
forced to bear the cost of his attendance.

in addition to these difficulties there were other drawbacks that
seemed to threaten a speedy termination to these parliaments. the
session was very short; the business was prepared beforehand, the
laws being drawn up by the bishops, earls, barons, justices, and
others who formed the king's council; and several statutes and
laws were thus hastily and ill considered.

in spite of all these excuses for bracciolini, experience has
proved that his observation was shallow; and it is possible that,
with his profound insight into the human mind, he might not have
made it had he gone deeply into english character; but it seems
that he deemed it unworthy of his study, england being "a country,
which," as he says, "he did not like at all,"--"hujus patriae,
quam parum diligo" (ep. i. 2). with such an aversion to us it is
no wonder that he had no faith in the continuance of our
parliament, for no stronger reason, probably, than that it was an
english institution; but had he foreseen its durability he would
have been a greater wonder than he was from having his eyes more
fully opened than were the eyes of any man at that period to the
rare qualities possessed by englishmen; their unpretending
magnanimity; their fine talents for business; their keen views in
policy; the great things they had done in the arts of peace and
war, as well as their capability of continuing to accomplish still
greater achievements in both; the solidity of their understandings
and their reflective spirits, which, when directed and applied to
political schemes, devise and consummate sound and lasting reforms
of the state.




chapter iii.

bracciolini setting about the forgery of the annals.


i. the proposal made in february, 1422, by a florentine, named
lamberteschi, and backed by niccoli.--ii. correspondence on the
matter, and mr. shepherd's view that it referred to a
professorship refuted.--iii. professional disappointments in
england determine bracciolini to persevere in his intention of
forging the annals.--iv. he returns to the papal secretaryship,
and begins the forgery in rome in october, 1423.

i. about this period bracciolini commenced the forgery of the
annals. in noticing the preliminary steps to that fabrication, and
then glancing back at a few circumstances peculiar to his age,
while touching upon some incidents hitherto passed over in his
biography, we shall have all the necessary lights and shades in
his life that will be of use to us in the maintenance and
illustration of our theory.

although he received in exchange for the living of 120 florins a
year another of the annual worth of l40 with slighter duties
attached to it, he still continued to express dissatisfaction at
his fortunes, and desire a sinecure canonry in england that would
enable him to live in literary ease at home. when, however, an
alternative was presented to him of returning to the pontifical
secretariate, through the intercession of one of his powerful
italian friends, cardinal adimari, archbishop of pisa, he rudely
scouted the overture upon these grounds: that he would "rather be
a free man than a public slave"; that he had "a smaller opinion of
the papacy and its limbs than the world believed"; that "if he had
thought as highly of the secretaryship to the pope, as many did,
he would long before have gone back to it; and that if he lost
everything, from what he now had, he would not want."--"video quae
cardinalis pisanus scribit de secretariatu. sane si ego illud
officium tantum existimarem, quantum nonnulli, ego jamdudum istuc
rediissem: sed si omnia deficerent, hoc quod nunc habeo, non
deerit mihi. ego minus existimo et pontificatum et ejus membra
quam credunt. cupio enim liber esse, non publicus servus"
(ep. i. 17).

just as he was in this bad humour, disgusted with his patron and
the world, and in the most cynical of moods, a proposal reached
him from florence, which, as set forth to view by himself in
communications to his friend niccoli, is so dimly disclosed as to
be capable of two interpretations: the rev. william shepherd in
his life of him understands his ambiguous terms as having
reference to a professorship, the words of mr. shepherd being:

--"piero lamberteschi ... offered him a situation, _the nature of
which is not precisely known_, but which was probably that of
public professor in one of the italian universities" (life of
poggio bracciolini, p. 138). now i conceive, and shall attempt to
prove that the proposal was not about a "situation," but to forge
additional books to the hopelessly lost history of tacitus.

niccolo niccoli seems to have been at the bottom of the business;
at any rate, he appears to have advised his bosom friend to
undertake the task; for bracciolini says that he "thinks he will
follow his advice, while writing to him from the london palace of
cardinal beaufort, in a letter dated the 22nd of february, 1422,
respecting "a suggestion" and "an offer" made by his fellow-
countryman, piero lamberteschi, who, he says, "will endeavour to
procure for me in three years 500 gold sequins. if he will make it
600, i will at once close with his proposal. he holds forth
sanguine hopes about several future profitable contingencies,
which, i am inclined to believe, may probably be realized; yet it
is more prudent to covenant for something certain than to depend
on hope alone." "placent mihi quae pierus imaginatur, quaeque
offert; et ego, ut puto, sequar consilium vestrum. scribit mihi se
daturum operam, ut habeam triennio quingentos aureos: fient
sexcenti, et acquiescam. proponit spem magnam plurium rerum, quam
licet existimem futuram veram, tamen aliquid certum pacisci satius
est, quam ex sola spe pendere" (ep. i. 17).

speaking further on in the letter about lamberteschi, he says: "i
like the occupation to which he has invited me, and hope i shall
be able to produce something worth reading; but for this purpose,
as i tell him in my letters, i require the retirement and leisure
that are necessary for literary work." "placet mihi occupatio, ad
quam me hortatur, et spero me nonnihil effecturum dignum lectione;
sed, ut ad eum scribo, ad haec est opus quiete et otio literarum."

ii. the expression of his hope that he would "produce something
worth reading," and the mention of his want, in order that he
should accomplish what was required of him, "retirement and
leisure for literary work," quite set at rest mr. shepherd's
theory that the proposal had reference to a professorship. in the
first place, professors in those days did not collect their
lectures and publish them for the behoof of those who had not the
privilege of hearing them delivered. they did not give their
addresses an elaborate form, nor introduce into them the novel
views and profound and accurate thought with which professors now
dignify their vocation from chairs in universities, especially
those of oxford and cambridge, or places of public instruction, as
the royal institution in albemarle street, with its professor
tyndall, or the royal school of mines and museum of practical
geology in jermyn street, with its professor huxley. they could
not then "produce something worth reading." in the second place
they did not require the "retirement and leisure necessary for
literary work"; they talked about what they knew in the most
simple and artless manner; made no preparations beforehand; walked
into a class room, and, book in hand, greek or roman classic,
discoursed to their pupils about the meaning of this or that
passage or the rendering of this or that word benefiting the
juvenile class with the spontaneous harvest of their cultivated
minds, and giving the opinions of others a great deal more freely
than they gave their own: all that they said, too, was detached
and trite; and if books are valuable, as consisting of perfectly
combined parts, and new or extraordinary contents, the lectures of
the fifteenth century professors would not have been worth the
paper on which they were written. bracciolini, then, would never,
in the contemplation of turning a professor, have spoken of
"producing something worth reading"; nor, for the discharge of
professorial duties, would he speak of requiring "retirement and
leisure for literary work." it is clear that mr. shepherd is
altogether wrong in his conjecture.

and now as to mine. if the dim revelations concerned a plan about
forging the annals, then "something worth reading" bracciolini
certainly did produce; for the annals is,--taking the
circumstances under which it was composed into consideration--
about one of the most wonderful literary creations that we have;
on every page there is indication of the "labour limae,"--the
filing and polishing that are the result of the "retirement and
leisure necessary to literary work"; and, though not bearing a
very striking resemblance to the history of tacitus, of which it
is intended to be the supplement, it was, nevertheless, contrived
with so much artfulness that, for more than four hundred years, it
has deceived the scholars of europe: yes, indeed, the author

    "gave out such a seeming
    to seal their eyes up,--close as oak,--
    they thought 'twas tacitus."

the more the passages in these interesting letters are considered,
the stronger becomes the impression that they are all about a
scheme for forging the annals of tacitus. even those which seem to
give a colouring to mr. shepherd's view in reality favour mine.

a part of the original scheme appears to have been that
bracciolini was to go to hungary: what for is not mentioned. it
then becomes a matter of conjecture. mine is, that, on account of
the belief current in those days that singular treasures of
ancient history were to be found more readily than elsewhere in
barbarous countries, and that the more barbarous the country the
greater the chance of recovering an ancient classic, so
bracciolini was to go, or feign that he had gone to hungary, and
then on returning give out that he had there found some of the
lost books of the history of tacitus. if this be not the right
conjecture, it can barely be understood why bracciolini should
make a mystery about this visit. "if i undertake a journey to
hungary," he says, "it will be unknown to everybody but a few, and
down the throats of these i shall cram all sorts of speeches,
since i will pretend that i have come from here," that is, from
england. "si in hungariam proficiscar, erit ignotum omnibus,
praeter paucos; quin simulabo me huc venturum, et istos pascam
verbis." (ep. i. 18). this intention to keep the journey to
hungary a secret looks as if his going there were connected with
the wrong act suggested, seeing that men usually resort to
concealment when they commit a wrong act, and endeavour to lead
people astray with respect to it (as bracciolini showed an
inclination to do) by misstatements and falsehoods: then
bracciolini knew well that the commission of a forgery would be
immediately suspected were it bruited abroad that he had come from
hungary where he had found a long-lost classic because those were
days when book-finders were in the habit of first forging works,
and then visiting far distant lands to report on their return that
they had there recovered mss. which they themselves had written.

another passage strengthens my view, though, at a first glance, it
favours mr. shepherd's. after observing that his friend "knew well
how he preferred liberty and literary leisure to the other things
which the vast majority held in the highest estimation and made
the objects of their ambition," bracciolini proceeds thus: "and if
i were to see that i should get that which our friend picro
expects, i would go not only to the end of europe but as far as to
the wilds of tartary, especially as i should have the opportunity
of paying attention to greek literature, which it is my desire to
devour with avidity, were it but to avoid those wretched
translations, which so torment me that there is more pain in
reading than pleasure in acquiring knowledge."--"id primum scias
volo, me libertatem et otium litterarum praeponere rebus caeteris,
quae plures existimant permaximi, atque optant. sique videro id me
consecuturum, prout sperat pierius noster, non solum ad sarmatas,
sed scythas usque proficiscar, praesertim proposita facultate
dandi operam graecis litteris, quas avide cupio haurire, ut fugiam
istas molestas translationes, quae ita me torquent, ut pluris sit
molestiae in legendo, quam in discendo suavitatis." (ep. i. 18.)

this is the passage that must have particularly induced mr.
shepherd to think that what was offered to bracciolini was a
professorship; and as bracciolini spoke of the opportunity that
would be afforded to him of studying greek literature, that the
professorship was of greek. but mr. shepherd ought not to have
conjectured that the professorship must have been in some italian
university; it is clear that if bracciolini was to carry out the
proposal of lamberteschi, he was, from the original plan, to have
gone to hungary. the professorship must, therefore, have been in
hungary. but in 1422 no professor was wanted in that country,
because it had no university: hungary then was, and remained a
wilderness of unlettered barbarism for nearly half a century
after, it not being until 1465, half a dozen years from the death
of bracciolini, that matthias corvinus established in buda the
first hungarian university, filling it with valuable works which
he got copied from rare manuscripts in the principal cities of
italy, especially rome and florence, and inviting to it men as
learned as bracciolini, not only from italy, but also france and
germany. what bracciolini really alludes to is not a
professorship, but the money he was to get for his forgery,--the
500 or 600 gold sequins; and as money was then worth about twenty
times more than it is now, it was a moderate fortune of ten or
twelve thousand pounds; and when he should have such means at his
disposal, he would have quite sufficient for his purpose; he could
then forsake the clerical duties which were so onerous and
distasteful to him, to devote himself in peace and comfort to his
favourite study of greek literature, with which he became
specially captivated just at this period of his life from reading
for the first time in the magnificent library of cardinal beaufort
the works of the greek fathers, above all, chrysostom, whom he
looked upon as the greatest of all writers; for writing to niccoli
from the london palace of cardinal beaufort in the summer of 1420,
he speaks of "preferring chrysostom to everybody else whom he had
ever read,"--"joannes chrysostomus, quem omnibus, quos ego unquam
legerim, praefero" (ep. i. 7); and, on another occasion, in a
letter to the same friend, again referring to chrysostom, he
bursts into the enthusiastic exclamation: "this man by a good
shoulder, or more, overtops everybody":--"hic vir longe humero
supereminet omnes" (ep. i. 8). a still greater, nay, "the greatest
reason for his desire of returning to greek literature," he gives
in a letter to niccoli dated london, the 17th of july, 1420, that,
in "skimming over aristotle during the spring of that year, not
for the purpose of studying him then, but reading and seeing what
there was in each of his works,"--he had found that sort of
"perusal not wholly unprofitable, as he had learnt something every
day, superficial though it might be, from understanding aristotle
in his own language, when he found him in the words of translators
either incomprehensible or nonsensical." "ego jam tribus mensibus
vaco aristoteli, non tam discendi causa ad praesens, quam legendi,
ac videndi, quid in quoque opere contineatur: nec est tamen omnino
inutilis haec lectio; disco aliquid in diem, saltem superficie
tenus, et haec est causa potissima, cur amor graecarum litterarum
redierit, ut hunc virum quasi elinguem, et absurdum aliena lingua,
cognoscam sua."

iii. as bracciolini gave his assent to the fabrication of
additional books to the history of tacitus, his friends niccoli
and lamberteschi as well as himself were of opinion that his
presence was required in italy, in order that the three should
take counsel together, and, discussing the matter in concert,
deliberate fully what was best to be done: "nam maturius
deliberare poterimus, quid sit agendum," he says in a letter
addressed to niccoli from london on the 5th of march, 1422; and as
he left england for italy in the summer, and did not begin his
forgery till the autumn of the next year, he spent the interval of
some eighteen, nineteen or twenty months in continually holding
cabinet councils with his two friends, and secretly devising with
them on what plan he could best execute the addition to the
history of tacitus; no doubt, he thought they had so cleverly
arranged matters in providing against all mishaps that he never
would be found out. "veniam ad vos," he continues in the same
letter; "et tunc propositis in unum conditionibus, discussisque in
utramque partem rationibus, meliorem, ut spero, eligemus partem."

bracciolini was, notwithstanding, undesirous of leaving england
just yet, from keeping his eye fixed upon the main chance. there
was the pleasant prospect before him of his living, which had such
heavy duties attached to it, being exchanged for a sinecure worth
l20 a year, "all," he said, "he coveted, and no more"; but it
being uncertain when such good fortune would attend him, he knew
not what to do,--whether, as things now stood, he should return to
italy, and lose all chance of getting the free benefice, or stay a
little longer in england and wait the possible exchange. "credo me
inventurum pro hac beneficium liberum, et sine cura xx librarum:
hoc si fieri poterit, satis est mihi, nec opto amplius; veruntamen
nescio quando hoc inveniam; neque scio, an sit melius isto venire,
prout res nunc se habent, an expectare paulum, quaerens an possem
hanc facere permutationem" (ep. i. 18). three months passed
without the exchange being effected, whereupon as time progressed,
his hopes, like the courage of bob acres, "oozed out at his
fingers' ends." still he was unwilling to lose what had cost him a
great deal of importunity, as well as much time and anxiety of
mind by any fault on his part, such as being in too great a hurry
over the matter; so he told his friend niccoli when writing to him
in june; as that "there was nothing else which detained him in
england but the business of effecting the exchange of his
benefice, which from the badness of the times was a much worse
living than it was considered to be:" he also came to the definite
determination that if in two months what he had been looking for
turned up, he would make his arrangements immediately and be off
to his two friends at home; and even if he got nothing, still he
would start for italy in august at the latest. "ut alia epistola
ad te scripsi, nihil aliud me hic tenet, nisi cura permutandi hoc
beneficium, quod defectu temporum multo tenuius est, quam
ferebatur. nollem enim, id quod tanto et temporis impendio
quaesivi, et animi sollicitudine, nunc amittere vitio festinandi.
si his duobus mensibus emerserit aliquid, quod cupio, concludam
statim, atque ad vos veniam; sin autem nihil invenero, etiam
veniam ad vos." (ep. i. 22 in.)

cardinal beaufort had in the april of 1422 promised to get him a
prebend for his church,--a simple, as distinguished from a
dignitary prebend. if without a dean and chapter inducting him
into a prebendal stall, which he did not want, he could go to
italy and there draw every year the stipend granted for the
maintenance of a prebendary out of the estate of an english
collegiate church, possibly in the diocese of winchester, he would
not have visited england in vain. but when he reminded the
cardinal of his promise, and claimed its performance, beaufort
receded from his position. "to trust the speeches of such
persons," said bracciolini, "is like holding a wolf by the ears,"
(quoting what the old greeks used to say, [greek: ton oton echein
ton lukon] when they wanted to denote the awkward position of a
man holding on to something when it was difficult for him to cling
to it, and still more dangerous for him to let it go). from that
moment bracciolini ceased to place any further trust in cardinal
beaufort, and turned with redoubled zest to the proposal of
lamberteschi as one on which he alone relied: "quidam me duobus
jam mensibus suspensum tenet promittens mihi daturum praebendam
quandam pro hac ecclesia: nunc autem cum rem urgerem, et ad calcem
cuperem pervenire, recessit a promissis suis. credere verbis
istorum est, ac si auribus lupum teneas. tu vero da operam, et cum
primum petrus responderit, me de eo facias certiorem: nam hoc
solum expecto" (ep. i. 21). from this time his mind was made up:
he would leap the rubicon: he would go in for the forgery, and his
friend must have confidence in him. so speaking of his powers for
the great task which he meditated he proceeds thus interestingly
in the letter to niccoli bearing date london, the 10th of june,
1422: "i want you to have no distrust: give me the leisure and the
time for 'writing that history'" (the nearest approach this to a
disclosure of the grand secret so frequently hinted at by him in
the london letters of the spring and summer of 1422), "and i will
do something you will approve. my heart is in the work, though i
question my powers." then quoting the sentiment from virgil about
"labour overcoming everything," he proceeds with unabated
interest: "i have not for four years devoted any attention to
literature, nor read a single book that can be considered well-
written,--as you may judge from these letters of mine which are
not what they used to be; but i shall soon get back into my old
manner. when i reflect on _the merits of the ancient writers of
history, i recoil with fear from the undertaking_" (mark that);
"though when i consider what are the writers of the present day, i
recover some confidence in the hope that if i strive with all my
might, i shall be inferior to few of them." he then implores his
friend to let him know the reply of lamberteschi as soon as
possible. "nec dubites volo; si dabitur otium et tempus
describendi gesta illius, aliquid agam quod probabis. cor bonum,
adest mihi; nescio an vires aderint: tamen 'labor omnia vincit
improbus.' quatuor his annis nullam dedi operam studiis
humanitatis, nec legi librum, quod ad eloquentiam spectaret; quod
ex ipsis litteris meis potes conjicere. non sunt enim quales esse
consuevere; sed tamen brevi tempore redigar in priorem statum.
_cum priores rerum scriptores considero, deterreor a scribendo_;
cum vero nostri temporis, nonnihil confido, sperans me paucis
inferiorem futurum, si omnino nervos intendero. tuum vero sit
studium, ut quam primum certior fiam responsionis petri" (ep. i. 21).

iv. he did not remain in england long after this; soon after the
midsummer of 1422 he left this country. his motive for taking this
step may have been that he ended by giving up all hope of
exchanging his laborious living for a sinecure free benefice, or
of obtaining a permanent appointment to a prebend that was without
any jurisdiction attached to it; or, what may be far more likely,
he resolutely abandoned every object he had in view in england for
the far brighter prospects that opened out before him at home if
he undertook the forgery which had been proposed to him by
lamberteschi, and to which he had been invited by the promise of,
in the first instance, a magnificent pecuniary reward, and
afterwards the possibility of many rare advantages.

only a fortnight after the last letter to niccoli he addressed to
him another, the last he wrote from london, on the 25th of june,
1422, couched in language which showed how deeply involved his
florentine friend was in the plot of the forgery: "if lamberteschi
would only place something certain before us, which we could adopt
or approve," he wrote; and "how heartily i hope that lamberteschi
will do what would be so agreeable to us both." "si petrus certum
quid responderit, quod sequi ant probare possimus"--"quam maxime
exopto, ut petrus perficiat, quae vellemus" (ep. i. 22).

from this day we hear no more of him in london. sometime during
the summer of 1422 he returned to rome, and, following the advice
of the cardinal archbishop of pisa, went back to his old
employment in rome at the secretariate, but now, it would appear,
as the principal secretary to the pope,--a post which he obtained
with little or no intercession, as borne testimony to by himself:
--"ego effectus sum secretarius pontificis, et quidem nullis
precibus, vel admodum paucis" (ep. ii. 2).

here then was bracciolini again in rome, not then a city of saints
and sacred things, but of scoffing priests and absolved sinners:
we all know what luther said on returning to wittenberg, after his
first visit to rome: "everything is permitted there except to be
an honest man." if that was true at the commencement of the
sixteenth century, it was much more true at the commencement of
the fifteenth.

count corniani, in his "ages of italian literature," is of opinion
that bracciolini had been in hungary (ii. 76). if so, it must have
been after he left england; he could not then have been so soon,
as i have stated, in rome: he was there, however, for a certainty,
as some of his letters now extant show, in the earlier portion of
the spring of the following year; even this is against his having
been in hungary, except on the ground that almost immediately
after he had arrived there, he found that whatever it was that
lamberteschi had offered to him was neither practicable nor
agreeable; therefore he relinquished it and accepted the office of
secretary in the papal court. bracciolini, however, does not seem
to have gone to hungary; nor was there any necessity that he
should have done so, if my theory be correct; for then, so far
from lamberteschi's offer being neither practicable nor agreeable,
it was both so feasible and pleasant, that it was in order to
accomplish it, he expressly accepted the secretary's post in the
court of rome. he could not have carried out the forgery had he
remained in england, because he would not have had the necessary
leisure, on account of the heavy duties attached to his cure; and
we have seen how he could get neither a sinecure nor a simple
prebend; but to be in the secretariate of the papacy was to be the
holder of an office with little or nothing to do, which gave him
ample leisure for literary pursuits. he, therefore, became
reconciled to accepting the papal secretaryship; "it being the way
with a wise man," he observed in a philosophic spirit, "to do the
best he can under circumstances, and be satisfied." if by being
secretary to the pope he saw he could procure what he wanted,
which was "obtaining a support," stick to the secretariate he
would; accordingly, he staid in rome, devoting himself to his
books. "parere temporis semper sapientis est habitum. si videro me
hac via consecuturum, quod cupio, hoc est aliquod sustentaculum,
tum adhaeream: quiescens in studiis, hic manebo" (ep. ii. 2).

as if preparing for some great literary undertaking connected with
antiquity, he wrote from rome on the 15th of may, 1423, to his
friend niccoli to let him have without the least delay all his
notes and extracts from the various books (and they not a few and
miscellaneous) which he had read; here it may be observed that
what cortese, bishop of urbino, says of the camaldolese general,
traversari, is strictly applicable to him:--"such was his
inexhaustible love of reading, he regretted a moment spent away
from his books; and every day, when not engaged in writing,
devoured the compositions of the ancient greeks and romans":
("erat in hoc homine inexhaustus quidem legendi amor; nullum enim
patiebatur esse vacuum tempus. quotidie aut scribebat, aut aliquid
ex graecis latinisque litteris mandabat"):--"mittas ad me, rogo,
singula commentariola mea, hoc est, excerpta illa ex variis
libris, quos legi, quae sunt plurima, ac dispersa; collige simul
omnia, oro te, et ad me quamprimum mittas" (ep. ii. 2).

having, no doubt, obtained in due time the notes and extracts
wanted, apparently in the autumn of 1423, he then set about the
commencement of his immortal and wonderful forgery, or, as he
styles it in the fabrication itself, his "condensed and inglorious
drudgery,"--"nobis in arto et inglorius labor" (annal. iv. 31);
for in a letter written from rome in the night of the 8th of
october that year he makes a reflection about "beginnings of any
kind being arduous and difficult," following up the remark with
these striking words: that "what the ancients did pleasantly,
quickly and easily was to him troublesome, tedious and
burdensome"; a remark which he could not have made unless he was
attempting something in the way of the ancients; unless, moreover,
he was just setting about it; then he consoles himself by again
repeating his favourite sage old saw from virgil: that "hard work
gets over everything":--"in quibusvis quoque rebus principia sunt
ardua et difficilia; ut quod antiquioribus in officio sit
jucundum, promptum ac leve, mihi sit molestum, tardum, onerosum.
sed 'labor omnia vincit improbus'" (ep. ii. 5).

a month after this significant declaration he was hard at work
forging the annals of tacitus; for we find him earnestly plying
for books that were indispensable for any one writing the history
of the early roman emperors. in a letter to niccoli dated rome,
the 6th of november, 1423, he begs his friend to do all he can to
get him some map of ptolemy's geography; to bear it in mind in
case one should happen to fall in his way; also not to forget
suetonius and the other historians, and, above all, plutarch's
lives of illustrious characters: "vellem aliquam chartam ptolemaei
geographiae, si fieri posset; in hoc cogita, si quid forte
inciderit; ac etiam suetonium, aliosque historicos, et praesertim
plutarchi viros illustres non obliviscaris" (ep. ii. 7).

if it be said that bracciolini wrote a history of florence, and
that these remarks which, unquestionably, refer to some "history"
from the expression "describendi gesta illius," apply to that
work, it must be borne in mind that he did not write that history
until towards the close of his life, that is, more than thirty
years after these letters which passed between him and niccoli,
for the events recorded in his history of florence are carried
down to as late as the year 1455; that that historical work is the
only one he wrote under his own name; that it is no more written
in imitation of the ancients, than any other of his acknowledged
productions; and that even if it were, he would not have required
for its composition such maps as ptolemy's, nor such works as
those of suetonius and plutarch. in fact, the most acute ingenuity
cannot rescue bracciolini from the charge that in october 1423 he,
then resident in rome, began to forge a work with the intention of
palming it off upon the world as written by an ancient roman: as i
proceed i shall convincingly show that that ancient roman was
tacitus, and that that work was the annals.




chapter iv.

bracciolini as a bookfinder.


i. doubts on the authenticity of the latin, but not the greek
classics.--ii. at the revival of letters popes and princes offered
large rewards for the recovery of the ancient classics.--iii. the
labours of bracciolini as a bookfinder.--iv. belief put about by
the professional bookfinders that mss. were soonest found in
obscure convents in barbarous lands.--v. how this reasoning throws
the door open to fraud and forgery.--vi. the bands of bookfinders
consisted of men of genius in every department of literature and
science.--vii. bracciolini endeavours to escape from forging the
annals by forging the whole lost history of livy.--viii. his
letter on the subject to niccoli quoted, and examined.--
ix. failure of his attempt, and he proceeds with the forgery of
the annals.

i. when we thus see bracciolini setting to work in this quiet,
business-like manner to forge the annals of tacitus, as if it were
a general, common-place occurrence, a grave suspicion enters the
mind whether it was not a thing very ordinarily done in his day;
if so, whether we may not have a wholesale fabrication of the
latin classics; which is very annoying to contemplate when we
remember the number of works we shall have to reject as not having
been written by ancient romans but by modern italians, of the
fifteenth, and possibly the close of the fourteenth centuries. the
suspicion becomes all the stronger with the fact before us that
the literature of the ancient romans was totally extinguished in
europe in the very opening centuries of the christian aera; and
that their language would have been also lost had it not been
preserved till the age of justinian (527-565) by the pleadings and
writings of the leading lawyers; after which it is generally
believed that it was continued to be preserved, along with the
literature of the ancient romans, in the buildings founded by the
various monastic orders of christians. here again we are met by
another equally vexing circumstance, it being excessively
questionable whether monasteries ever really conserved, to any,
even the least extent, the interests of human knowledge. monks
never had any love for learning; did not appreciate the volumes of
antiquity; in fact, could not read them; for the latin was not
their latin; and they are not likely to have preserved what they
did not appreciate and could not read: the libraries they founded
were for bibles, missals and prayer-books: the schools they
established were for teaching children to read the testament and
prayer book, and to sing hymns and psalms, while the ancient
manuscripts they transcribed were, at best, the hagiological
productions of the fathers of the christian church.

but even if the works of the ancient romans were preserved by the
monks in their convent libraries, that was only till the approach
of the last quarter of the sixth century. then came the dark
period of the conquest of italy by the last swarm of the northern
barbarians from their native settlements in pannonia: italy
continued under the iron yoke of the dominion of these illiterate
lombards till their final overthrow towards the commencement of
the last quarter of the eighth century by the great conqueror,
warrior, christian and devoted admirer of learning, charlemagne:
during that period literature became entirely extinguished, for in
all the vigour and savage freedom of their fresh and unworn
barbarism these pannonian dunces were as diligent for two whole
centuries (568-774) in demolishing monasteries and destroying
books as in levelling fortresses and ravaging cities. for six
centuries after, a confused assemblage of different races of
boors, franks, normans and saracens, occupied italy; they cared
not a fig for knowledge; they did not know what a book was, for
they did not know the alphabet, engaged as they were, like those
kindred spirits in after ages, the ioways, mohicans and
ojibbeways, in perpetual wars and bloodshed: all this time the
light of literature never once broke in upon the scene: at length
traces of it were discerned in the revival of learning during the
age of petrarch and the father of modern italian prose, boccaccio,
in the middle of the fourteenth century. thus for eight hundred
years there was a moral eclipse of all that was excellent in human
knowledge in italy and the whole west of europe.

fortunately there was no such middle age of darkness in greece:
there the light of science and literature remained unextinguished:
the knowledge of the works of antiquity was cultivated in the east
with enthusiasm; and while we may be confident that we possess the
works of all those high and gifted spirits who adorned that bright
period which extends from homer and hesiod to plato and aristotle,
and again the works of all those greeks who flourished from the
death of alexander the great to the death of augustus caesar, the
brightest of whom were menander, theocritus, polybius, strabo, and
a gorgeous array of philosophers, sophists and rhetoricians, we
can be by no means sure that we have the real works of the roman
classics; there must even be the gravest doubt as to the
probability; for, though during the close of the fourteenth
century, throughout the fifteenth, and at the commencement of the
sixteenth, books purporting to be of their writing were constantly
being recovered, it was invariably under distressingly suspicious
circumstances; exactly the roman author that was wanted turned up;
and always for a certainty that roman author for whom the highest
price had been offered; the monastery was rarely famous, seldom in
italy, but obscure and situated in a barbarous country; the
discoverer, too, was not, as is generally supposed, an ignorant,
unlettered monk or friar, who could not read what he found, and
who could not, therefore be suspected of having forged what he
stated he had discovered; it was invariably a most cultured
scholar, nay, a man of the very highest literary attainments, an
exquisitely accomplished writer, to boot; a "grammaticus,"
forsooth, who possessed a masterly and critical knowledge of the
latin language.

ii. the unlettered gloom in which italy had been immersed for ages
was effectually dissipated by the great number of learned and
illustrious greeks who took refuge in the west of europe, in order
to escape from ottoman power long before the fall of
constantinople. on account of their enlightenment, literature
revived in florence, venice and rome; it speedily spread from the
cities of the great merchants and of the popes into the provincial
and inferior towns; thus italy was the first country in the west
where good taste, enlightened views, and generous emulation in the
sciences and the fine arts took the place of the ignorance, the
avarice and the venality which for centuries had held sole sway in
that civilized portion of the world. princes and nobles vied with
popes and cardinals in the restoration of letters; and now the
best way for a man to advance himself was to show a desire for the
promotion of letters; above all, for the discovery of manuscripts
of the ancient classics, which, when long looked for, and not
found, were usually,--from the too tempting reward, which was a
fortune,--forged by some unscrupulous "grammaticus," or writer of
latin.

iii. at the commencement of the fifteenth century, a little band
of men lived in rome: some were apostolic secretaries; all were
famous for their abilities; five were scholars endowed with
sterling talents, antonio lusco cincio de rustici, leonardo bruni,
and two others from florence, bracciolini, and dominici, afterwards
cardinal archbishop of ragusa. (pog. vita p. 180 from joannes baptista
poggius in orat. card. capranicae (miscell. ballutii tom. 3.) they
were all friends; and their delight was, like their masters, the popes,
to retire in summer from the heat of rome into the cool air of the
campagna; there, after a frugal repast, they held discourse daily,
like men of mind, on a variety of engaging topics: "sumus saepius
una confabulantes variis de rebus," says bracciolini in a letter
to francesco marescalcho of ferrara (op. pog. 307), and continues:
"incidit inter nos sermo de viris doctis et eloquentibus." thus

    "oft unwearied did they spend the nights,
    till the ledaean stars, so famed for love,
    wondered at them from above--
    they spent them not in toys, or lust, or wine;
    but search of deep philosophy,
    wit, eloquence, and poetry,
    arts which they loved."

of these men, the most extraordinary for superlative qualifications,
and, apparently that inseparable companion of the highest order of
genius, indefatigable energy, was bracciolini. muratori, in his
"annali d'italia" (anno 1459) speaks of him as "letterato insigne
di questi tempi," and, as leaving behind him when he died on the
30th of october, 1459, "molte opere e gran nome" (vol. xiii. 481).

when bracciolini first joined the papal court, guarino of verona,
aurispa and filelfo were making continuous voyages to greece in
order to fetch home manuscripts of greek authors yet unknown in
italy; at this time were found and first brought to the west of
europe the poems of callimachus, pindar, oppian and orpheus; the
commentaries of aristarchus on the iliad; the works of plato,
proclus, plotinus, xenophon and lucian; the histories of arrian,
cassius dio, and diodorus siculus; the geography of strabo;
procopius and some of the byzantine historians; gregory of
nazianzen, chrysostom, and other greek fathers of the church. in
emulation of these men bracciolini and a band of bookfinders,
assisted and rewarded by the wealth of princes and popes, went up
and down the countries of europe to find manuscripts of the
ancient works of the romans that were supposed to be lost; and it
is generally believed that the republic of letters is more
indebted to him than to anybody else of his manuscript finding age
for the numerous books that were found, and which without such
timely recovery we are given to understand, from the decaying
state of the manuscript and the pernicious place where it was
lighted on, would very soon, in almost every instance, have been
irrecoverably lost.

when bracciolini accompanied the papal court in the capacity of
secretary to the council of constance in 1414, he, one day, went
with two friends, cincio, the roman gentleman and scholar of
fortune, of the family de rustici, and the eminent schoolman and
finished writer bartolommeo de montepulciano to the monastery of
st. gall about twenty miles distant from constance for the purpose
of finding new manuscripts; his companions found lactantius, "de
utroque homine," vitruvius on architecture and the grammar of
priscian, while he himself found, in addition to the commentaries
of asconius pedianus on eight of cicero's orations,--the three
first books, and half of the fourth of the argonauticon of
valerius flaccus. on this discovery being communicated to
francesco barbaro, the latter in his reply spoke of other
discoveries of bracciolini's, of some of which we have no account
as to where they were found, nor when, except before 1414:
tertullian, lucretius, silius italicus, ammianus marcelinus,
manilius (his unfinished poem on "astronomy," clearly a forgery),
lucius septimius caper, eutychius and probus; and, adds barbaro,
"many others,"--"complures alios," among which aulus gellius may
be included. all these were found not by bracciolini alone, but
always in the company of very remarkable characters, and more
frequently than any other, bartolommeo de montepulciano, of whom
nothing is known, except that he was a splendid scholar, and great
bookfinder, or forger (the terms are synonymous), and that he
resided in rome in a pleasant villa situated near the lateran
church (pog. op. p. 2).

in the oration which he delivered over the remains of his friend
niccoli (op. 272) bracciolini says that he found in french and
german monasteries, besides quintilian, silius italicus, and part
of the poem of lucretius, some orations of cicero and nonius
marcellus. in his treatise "de infelicitate principum" (p. 394),
and in one of his letters (ii. 7), he mentions having found
cicero's orations along with columella in the monastery of cluny
in the maconnois district of burgundy; he gives the number of the
orations of cicero, which were eight (ep. iv. 2), and which are
generally supposed to have been those for caecina, rubirius and
roscius, against rullus and lucius piso, and those relating to the
agrarian laws. he also found cicero's two treatises de legibus and
de finibus. in his descriptio ruinarum urbis romae he states that
he found in the monastery of monte casino, near naples, frontinus
on the aqueducts of rome, and it was, as we know from one of his
letters (iii. 37), in july 1429. the abbe mehus, in the preface to
his edition of the works of traversari, adds that he found the
eight books of the mathematics of firmicus, which is confirmed by
himself (ep. iii. 37). while in england he recovered the poems of
julius calpurnicus who wrote pastorals in the reign of the emperor
carus; he also lighted in the monasteries on part of petronius
arbiter (ep. iv. 3), also part of statius, and book xv. in cologne
in 1423 (ib.); six years after he found the following twelve plays
of plautus: bacchides, mostellaria, mercator, miles gloriosus,
pseudolus, poenulus, persa, rudens, stichus, trinummus and
truculentus. in fact, he was occupied nearly all his days, as long
as he was in the vigour of life, in traversing germany and other
lands in search of ancient manuscripts, which he recovered in
monasteries at different times and in different places; nor was he
to be deterred from these toils, which have been likened to the
labours of hercules, by any stress of weather, length of journey
or badness of roads.

iv.--the account which he gives in his dialogue "de infelicitate
principum," while dwelling upon a custom of his of going from one
country to another in far distant and barbarous parts for latin
books, opens our eyes to a very strange state of belief which
obtained at the beginning of the fifteenth century with respect to
the refined works of the ancients;--that, because a number of
these manuscripts were discovered by him, and his band of
bookfinders, in obscure monasteries in barbarous countries, there
was to be deduced therefrom a definite conclusion that many more
were to be discovered in that way; and that this conclusion was so
firmly lodged in the minds of men it prevented popes and princes
from continuing to offer that pecuniary aid and those other
rewards which they had been for a long time in the habit of
tendering for the recovery of such manuscripts:--"when these,"
says he in the above-mentioned treatise, "had been brought to
light by him, and when the very sanguine and certain hope was held
forth of more being found, never after that did either a pope or a
prince give the slightest attention or assistance to the recovery
of those most illustrious men out of the convents of barbarians:"--
"haec cum ab eo fuissent in lucem edita, cumque uberior et certa
spes proposita esset ampliora inveniendi, nunquam postea aut
pontifex aut princeps vel minimum operae aut auxilii adhibuit ad
liberandos praeclarissimos illos viros ex ergastulis barbarorum"
(p. 393). this statement is so remarkably curious that it requires
a little consideration.

we can easily understand how the valuable works of the greeks and
romans, from the importance attached to them and the appreciation
in which they were held, were safest and longest preserved in
their respective countries, and that, therefore, they could have
been found, sooner than elsewhere, in greece and italy; but after
those countries had been thoroughly ransacked, it is not so clear
to comprehend how it should follow that their works were to be
just as rapidly and easily found in other, and those barbarous
countries, nay, indeed, more rapidly and more easily. to put this
forth was to endeavour to prepare people's minds for the numbers
of discoveries that were made, or, perhaps, more properly,
pretended to be made in foreign parts. it was, in fact, to pursue
this course of reasoning:--if those works had remained in
civilized hands, centuries would not have elapsed without the
world being cognizant of their existence; the learned could not
have lost sight of them; the select few would have transmitted
copies from generation to generation; but when they passed into
the possession of unlettered men living in barbarous countries,
they would then be altogether hidden from view; such people would
treat them as swine treat pearls; spurn them; not keep them in
libraries, but throw them away as useless lumber into cellars,
pits, dark holes, dirty passages, dry wells; fling them away as
refuse into dustbins or upon dungheaps. nearly as much says
bracciolini by these shadowy phrases: "in darkness"; "in a blind
dungeon"; "in a dirty dungeon;" "in dismal dungeons," and "in many
dens," as for instance, "for the sake of finding books that were
kept by them in their convents shut up _in darkness_ and
_in a blind dungeon_" (op. 393)--"he had rescued renowned
authors out of _the dismal dungeons_ in which, against their
will and without being used, they had been kept concealed (for
they were shut up in _many a den_ and _foul dungeon_" (ib.):--
"in tenebris"; "carcere caeco"; "foedo carcere"; "diris
carceribus," and "multis vinculis," e.g.:--"librorum
perquirendorum gratia, qui in ergastulis apud illos reclusi
detinentur _in tenebris_, et _carcere caeco_" (op. 393)--
"autores praeclaros ... _ex diris carceribus_ quibus inviti
obsoletique opprimuntur eruisset (sunt enim _multis vinculis_
et _foedo carcere_ abstrusi" (ib.). books thrown away in such
places must be regarded, when recovered, as found by the purest
accident; hence it was at once comprehensible how they had
remained unknown to the world for hundreds of years; for who would
think of looking for books in such places?

yet it was precisely in such places that bracciolini and his
companions looked for the books that they wanted; what is still
stranger, they always found in such queer places the exact books
they were in search of. it was so, for example, when they
recovered the books in the monastery of st. gall; the books were
not found where, bracciolini admits, they ought to have been, on
account of their excellence, on the shelves of the library, but
where slugs and toads are more frequently looked for and found
than books and manuscripts, in an exceedingly dirty and dark
dungeon at the bottom of a tower and one of these books,
quintilian, though described as "sound and safe," is also
described as being "saturated with moisture and begrimed with
mire," as if it had been made dirty expressly for the occasion of
the recovery: "quintilianum comperimus, adhuc salvum et incolumem,
plenum tamen situ et pulvere squalentem. erant non in bibliotheca
libri illi, ut eorum dignitas postulabat, sed in teterrimo quodam
et obscuro carcere, fundo scilicet unius turris." (from a letter
of bracciolini to guarino of verona, preserved in st. paul's
library, leipzic--printed at the end of poggiana, and dated jan. 1,
1417).

v. this kind of reasoning, when admitted, throws the door open to
fraud and forgery; but it cannot be admitted, because it is
fallacious in reality, sound in appearance only, as will be seen
by only putting a few natural questions:--how came these books
into such places? who took them from italy, greece, or other
enlightened parts of the globe? if some learned monk, made abbot
or prior of a convent of germany or hungary? or some equally
learned priest sent as bishop to christianize the heathen in still
more barbarous lands in the north in a far distant age, why should
succeeding monks, fonder, be it granted, of ploughing and reaping
than reading and writing, treat as refuse books which, though not
deemed by them of any value, as far as their own tastes and
inclinations were concerned, they, nevertheless, knew were held in
the very highest esteem by the studious in more civilized parts;
and that these studious people, understanding the language in
which they were written, and considering their contents most
precious, would willingly give in exchange for them at any time
not large, but enormous sums of money?

these are questions that cannot be answered with satisfaction:
they seem to give the highest colouring of truth to what has been
suggested, that there was a wholesale forgery of these books; and
one is almost inclined to give father hardouin credit, for being
quite right, when he expressed as his belief that, perhaps, not
more than two or three of the ancient latin classics were really
written by the old romans. [endnote 208]

vi. the clause in the passage just quoted from the "de
infelicitate principum":--"never after" (bracciolini had found a
great many books abroad, in germany and elsewhere) "did either a
pope or a prince give the slightest attention or assistance
towards the recovery of those most illustrious men out of the
convents of barbarians."--"nunquam postea aut pontifex aut
princeps vel minimum operae aut auxilii adhibuit ad liberandos
praeclarissimos illos viros ex ergastulis barbarorum," shows that
before the time of bracciolini the custom prevailed of valuable
assistance and large money rewards being given by popes and
princes for the recovery of ancient classics; and therefore
confirms what was stated in the first portion of this inquiry that
the custom was not confined to the age of leo x., but ranged back
to, at least, a hundred, if not, half as many more years. in that
way men, in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, made large
fortunes. in that way bracciolini made his.

the finding of any ancient latin mss. was a distinct profession in
those days, and bracciolini may be said to have studied the art,
of which he was one of the greatest experts, so carefully, and to
have practised it with such ability and diligence as to have
elevated it into a science. many enterprising scholars before him
had devoted themselves with indefatigable perseverance to
traversing, sometimes singly, but more frequently in bands of two,
three, or more, italy, greece, spain, and the more civilized
countries of europe for the purpose of ransacking,--or pretending
to ransack,--the shelves of convent libraries of their treasures.
as scarcely anything was more profitable than searching for mss.,--
particularly when it was certain that, after the looking for,
they would be found, if not of the particular authors wanted, yet
of others that would repay for the searching;--and as emperors and
popes, kings, princes, cardinals, ministers and bishops paid
fabulous prices for the literary treasures of ancient rome,
bracciolini improved upon this plan by extending the area of
search into the woods of germany, the wildernesses of bohemia and
hungary, and the not then over civilized fastnesses and forests of
england and marshes and bogs of france: the great thing with him
and his companions was, when they could not find, to forge; all
they had to ascertain was simply which ancient roman was
particularly wanted and would fetch the highest price; and as the
band consisted of men of genius of different tastes or faculties,--
poetical, historical or narrative, philosophical, grammatical or
critical, and scientific or mathematical, if the reward was
sufficiently munificent to pay for the time and labour, the highly
valued work that was wanted, no matter to what department of
literature or science it belonged, was sure to turn up, sooner or
later; and if the man who was to forge was not in the proper mood
of inspiration for the business, some other fabricated writer was
put forward on the ground that he was quite equivalent in merit to
the author that was desiderated, as when a thief or other vagabond
is wanted by a london detective, he is certain to turn up in due
time, and if not the actual delinquent, at any rate somebody else
as bad, who serves equally well for the culprit.

vii. bracciolini now engaged in forging an addition to the history
of tacitus, impelled to it from his intolerable and restless
passion for the acquisition of a fortune, greater even than his
constantly increasing avidity for knowledge, soon saw that it was
a task beset by enormous difficulties; nay, difficulties of an
apparently insuperable nature. we have no record that he was aware
of this; but we require no record to know it; his proceedings
pointed to it: we have already speculated as to the reasons which
must have induced him to forge the annals so strangely as he did,
but before those reasons could have entered his mind, they must
have been preceded by others: it is to be presumed that he
endeavoured, in the first instance, to continue the history of
tacitus, as tacitus himself would have continued it, by following
up the history of domitian with that of nerva; but the few
materials that were left rendered it impossible for him to record
the events in that emperor's reign on the broad and expansive plan
adopted by tacitus, which was to spread out the events of one year
so that they should fill four lengthy books. he therefore gave up
the notion as utterly impracticable; but in trying to get out of
the forgery of the annals he suggested another scheme of
fabrication just as audacious, and which he seems to have imagined
would have been just as remunerative.

two months after he had written for ptolemy's maps, plutarch's
lives, and the works of suetonius and other historians of the
first roman emperors, he addressed another letter to his
florentine friend, niccoli, dated the 8th of january, 1424, in
which he hinted at no less a forgery than the whole of livy's
history, and if circumstances had been favourable to it, we should
have, doubtless, had a composition so like the original,--even so
much more like than even what was afterwards honourably and
admirably done by freinshemius,--as to have defied detection. his
statement was that a learned goth, who had been a great traveller,
had told him he had seen the ten decades of livy's history in the
cistercian abbey of sora, near roschild, about a day's journey
from lubeck. he wrote in the highest spirits, as gay as a
butterfly, as playful as a kitten, and as light as a balloon; he
implored his friend to lose no time in seeking out cosmo de medici
and get his consent for the finding of these volumes, which he
described as written in two large, oblong volumes in lombard
characters. he added that the man who had brought the news was not
to be relied upon, yet he wished to believe him in a matter "out
of which coin could be made to such an amount as to be absolutely
incredible,"--"ex qua tantum lucrum fieri posset, quam esse omnino
incredulus" (ep. ii. 9).

he wished it to be further communicated to leonardo bruni who had
just been appointed chancellor of the republic of florence, in
hopes, no doubt, that bruni would further the scheme by money
assistance; he also wrote about it to leonello d'este;--all which
eagerness on his part with respect to forging the lost books of
livy can be easily accounted for, when, in exchange for a mere
copy of livy's imperfect history he got from beccadelli of
bologna, the minister of king alphonso i. of arragon, a sum
sufficient wherewith to purchase a landed estate:--"poggio
vendette un codice di tito livio per acquistarsi un podere, e il
panormita vendette un podere per acquistare il codice di tito
livio" (corniani, tom. ii. p. 122). although, for the purpose of
making a statement with a telling or striking effect, these are
the words of count corniani in his "i secoli della letteratura
italiana," it was not exactly "a farm" that was taken and given by
the accepter and disposer of a manuscript copy of livy; count
corniani himself is immediately his own contradicter by quoting in
a note a passage from one of beccadelli's letters (lib. v.), to
the effect that the "farm" in bracciolini's case was a "villa at
florence," as beccadelli thus wrote to king alphonso: "but i also
want to know who in your judgment acted wiser, poggio or myself;
he, that he might buy a _villa at florence_, sold a livy
which he had written with his own hand and was a most beautiful
copy; i, that i might buy a livy, sold a farm by auction":--"sed
et illud a prudentia tua scire desidero, uter ego an poggius
melius fecerit: is ut _villam florentiae_ emerit, livium
vendidit, quem sua manu pulcherrimus scripserat; ego ut livium
emam, fundum proscripsi." if bracciolini could get so much for an
incomplete copy of livy's history, what might he not hope to get
for a complete one? imagination wanders into the realms of fairy.
i am confident that if he had received the requisite encouragement
from niccolo niccoli, or leonardo bruni, or cosmo de medici, or
that munificent patron of letters, leonello d' este, afterwards
that enormously wealthy prince, the marquis of ferrara, and had
undertaken the task, he would have been more successful as an
imitator of livy than he proved himself to be (marvellous though
he was) as an imitator of tacitus. the genius of livy, and also of
sallust, was more in accord with his own than the staid majestic
coldness and the solemn curt sententiousness of tacitus. indeed,
he was such a devoted admirer of livy and sallust, that he reminds
the reader of them throughout his history of florence; in the
annals, too, he goes out of his way to lavish praises upon them,
and upon them only of all the roman historians: he speaks of
sallust as the "finest writer of roman history": and of livy, as
"famous, above others, for eloquence and fidelity":--"caius
sallustius, rerum romanarum florentissimus auctor" (iii. 30):--
"titus livius, eloquentiae ac fidei praeclarus in primis" (iv.
34). tacitus nowhere expresses such very lofty opinions of his,
two fellow and rival historians; on the contrary, he does not seem
to have so thoroughly approved their style and manner; at any
rate, he carefully avoided their mode of treating history. it is
true that in his agricola he speaks well of livy, but at the same
time he places fabius rusticus exactly upon the same level with
him:--for he says "that livy among the ancients, and fabius
rusticus among the modern authors were the most eloquent": "livius
veterum, fabius rusticus recentium, eloquentissimi auctores" (10);
he, therefore, never could have spoken of livy, as bracciolini
speaks of him in the annals, as "famous, _above others,_"--
"praeclarus _in primis_." this is another of those little
slips of bracciolini's, which, without question, at once, bring
his forgery to light.

viii. after these remarks, it cannot but be highly interesting to
the reader if i now place before him the whole of the very
remarkable, and what should be ever-memorable letter about the
contemplated forgery of livy, not only for the subject on which it
touches, but as exhibiting bracciolini in his most playful, and,
it may also be added, most roguish mood:--

"a learned man who is a goth in race, and has travelled over a
great part of the world, has been here; he is a man of a good
understanding, but unreliable. he said that he had seen the x.
decades of livy, in two big and oblong volumes written in lombard
characters, and there was on the title page of one volume a note
that the codex contained the ten decades of titus livy, and that
he had read some parts of these volumes. this he asserts with an
air of truth that commands belief; he told the same tale to
cardinal orsini, and to many more, and to all in the very same
words, so that i think this is no fib of his. what more do you
want? this statement of his, and his serious countenance, cause me
to give some credence to him. for it is a very good thing to be
misled in a matter of this kind, out of which coin can be made to
such an amount as to be absolutely incredible. therefore i have
wanted to write to you about this, that you may talk over it with
cosmo, and anxiously set to work for these volumes to be searched
for; it will be an easy job for you. the books are in the
monastery at sora that belongs to the cistercian order, about two
german miles from roschild, that is, a little more than a day's
journey from lubeek. prick up your ears, pamphilus. two volumes
big, oblong, in lombard characters, are in the monastery at sora
that belongs to the cistercian order, about two german miles from
roschild, and to be reached from lubeek in two days or so. see
then that cosmo writes as soon as possible to gherard de bueri,
for him to betake himself there when he has the opportunity,--aye,
betake himself at once to the monastery. for if this is true, it
will be a triumph over the dacians. the cardinal will send
somebody there, or commission a person to start post-haste. i
don't want such a big pill as this to slip out of our own throats;
therefore, be on the stir, look alive, and don't sleep over it.
for this is just what the man has stated, and though he might seem
to talk too fast, yet there is no reason why he should tell an
impudent lie, especially as he can gain nothing by telling lies.
therefore, i, who am such a sort of man as scarcely to believe
what i see, am induced to think that this is not entirely false,
and in a matter of this kind it is a proper thing to be deceived.
run then to cosmo,--press him,--importune him to make an advance
for these books to be brought to you safe and sharp. adieu. rome,
the 8th of january, 1424. what you do, mind you let me know. in
haste. tell this to our chancellor, leonardo. in that monastery
nearly all the kings of the dacians are buried:"--

"venit huc quidam doctus homo natione gothus, qui peragravit
magnam partem orbis; homo quidem est ingenio acuto, sed
inconstans. idem retulit se vidisse x. decades livii, duobus
voluminibus magnis, et oblongis, scriptas litteris longobardis, et
in titulo esse unius voluminis, in eo contineri decem decades titi
livii, seque legisse nonnulla in iis voluminibus. hoc ita verum
esse asserit, ut credi possit; retulit hoc cardinali de ursinis,
multisque praeterea, et omnibus eisdem verbis, ut opinor, non esse
haec ab eo conficta. quid quaeris? facit assertio sua, et constans
vultus, ut credam aliquid. melius est enim peccare in hanc partem,
ex qua tantum lucrum fieri posset, quam esse omnino incredulus.
itaque volui hoc ad te scribere, ut loquaris cum cosmo, desque
solicite operam, ut haec volumina quaerantur; nam facile erit
vobis. libri sunt in monasterio de sora, ordinis cisterciensium,
prope roschild ad duo milliaria theutonica, hoc est, prope lubich
paulo amplius quam est iter diei unius. arrige aures, pamphile.
duo sunt volumina, magna, oblonga, litteris longobardis, in
monasterio de sora, ordinis cisterciensium, prope roschild, ad duo
milliaria theutonica, quo adiri potest a lubich biduo amplius.
cura ergo, ut cosmus scribat quam primum diligenter ad gherardum
de bueris, ut, si opus sit, ipse eo se conferat; imo omnino se
conferat ad monasterium. nam si hoc verum est, triumphandum erit
de dacis. cardinalis mittet illuc nescio quem, aut committet uni
propediem discessuro. nollem hunc tantum bolum de faucibus nostris
cadere; itaque matura, ac diligenter; ne dormias. nam haec vir
ille ita affirmavit, ut quamvis verbosior videretur, tamen nulla
esset causa, cur ita impudenter mentiretur, praesertim nullo
proposito mentiendi praemio. ego igitur ille, qui vix credo quae
video, adducor, ut hoc non omnino esse falsum putem, et hac una in
re honestum est falli. tu igitur curre, insta, preme cosmum, ut
aliquid expendat, quo litterae cito tutae deferantur. vale. romae
die viii. januarii 1424. quid autem egeritis, cura, ut sciam. manu
veloci. dicas haec leonardo nostro cancellario. in eo monasterio
omnes fere dacorum reges sepeliuntur." (lib. ii. ep. 9.)

i cannot pass away from this singular letter without some comment.
it is very certain that there never was known to have been any
such copy of livy in the monastery of sora, though tiraboschi, who
is simple enough to believe in the sincerity of bracciolini,
speaks of these volumes as having shared the same fate as other
manuscripts, that is, being lost:--"questo si raro codice ha avuta
la stessa sorte degli altri" (vol. i. p. 452 n.). we may be
assured that the "two big, oblong volumes" never had an
existence:--the two volumes, like sir john falstaff's men in
buckram, increase in number in the telling, for in a subsequent
letter addressed by bracciolini to leonello d'este, the "two"
become "three": what is more, the learned goth's "serious
statement" is "a sacred oath"; the "lombard characters" are
intermixed with some "gothic" ones, and "another person" is found
who declares that he has also seen the whole of the decades of
livy:--"nicolaus quidam, natione gothus ... _sancte juravit_
esse ... tria praegrandia volumina, et oblonga, conscripta literis
longobardis et nonnullis praeterea _gothicis_ intermixtis ...
nunc quoque _alius testis_ horum librorum reperiatur, qui se
quoque decades omnes vidisse asseveret" (pog. ep. xxx., post lib.
de variet. fortun.). after this one is almost inclined to exclaim
with shakespeare's prince hal: "prithee, let him alone: we shall
have more anon." where there is such inconsistency in the putting
of a statement, the account looks uncommonly like a figment. we
may be equally sure that the learned goth never had an existence,
any more than the "two" volumes, or the "three" volumes; (for,
with the different statements, it is difficult to determine their
number), nor, consequently, can there be any truth about the
communication made by the goth to cardinal orsini, and many
others.

it will have been observed also that bracciolini himself insists
on the probable myth of the whole tale; the learned goth is
"unreliable"; he maintains that he is "telling no fib";
bracciolini doubts himself whether what he hears is "true," but he
can "see no reason why the man should lie": thus repeatedly in a
very short letter he strongly suspects the veracity of the story--
he only believes it because he wishes to believe it.

the whole thing was trumped up by himself for a very obvious
reason: he wanted to ascertain whether cosmo de' medici (or any
other rich man) would give money (in fact, a fortune,) for the
recovered portion of the whole history of livy: that being
ascertained, he had his own scheme of further procedure; he kept
that to himself; it has died with him, and, never having been
revealed, it can only be divined:--my conjecture (looking at the
character of bracciolini) is that he would have played upon the
credulity of cosmo de' medici, leonardo bruni, leonello d'este (or
any other man whom he could have duped) till he had had time,
which would have been years, to forge what he would have continued
to assert, until the completion of the forgery, was in existence
somewhere in germany, a mistake only having been made by the
"learned goth" as to the name and site of the monastery. hence his
speaking of that imaginary individual as "unreliable,"--or
whatever else he may mean by "inconstans,"--a word that he uses to
denote a man who might fall into mistakes, as, for example, in not
recollecting the exact name or precise situation of a monastery,
but who could not possibly err as to the nature of a book which he
had seen, handled, opened and read, and had learning to understand
what he read.

ix. notwithstanding the enthusiasm and energy, as well as the
craft and force, with which he laid the foundation for its
acceptance, nothing came of this grand determination--this
indirect proposal of his to produce by imposture the whole lost
portion of the history of livy; so whether he liked it or not, if
he wanted to get a sum equivalent in these days to a little
fortune of l10,000 at the least, he had to return to the
fabrication of the annals of tacitus; and get through the
ungrateful task as best he could. so, "hanging down his ears," as
horace says,

    "ut iniquae mentis asellus,
    cum gravius dorso subiit onus,"

he steadily set to work in the january of 1424, with a patient
soul and an iron will to the completion of the dolorous drudgery
from which he had ascertained to his sorrow there was no escape.

all went on for months,--for years in silence and secresy, as the
case always is when mischief is brewing. upwards of three years
and a half thus elapsed; then the low and hidden rumblings of the
volcano were again heard; once more vague and mysterious
utterances with respect to tacitus passed in their correspondence
between bracciolini and niccoli. two years,--or nearly that time,--
again passed: then followed the pangs of labour from the womb of
forgery: through the hands of bracciolini came a hitherto
thoroughly unknown ms. of tacitus, which he said had been brought
to him by a monk from a far distant convent in the easternmost
corner of saxony, on the borders of bohemia; (the reader will be
pleased to observe not "hungary" although the country adjacent to
it;--so circumstances shift and vary, in the lapse of years, and
owing to the inconstancy of men's intentions). the new codex was
an affair at once startling and gratifying: it was such a triumph
over darkness in the progress of knowledge that it rivalled a
conquest over the dacians in the march of civilization: for the
first time it brought to light as the opening portion of the
history of tacitus what are now known as "the last six books of
the annals." these i shall now endeavour to point out were the
handiwork of bracciolini, to whose wondrous power of assimilating
his literary abilities to those of another i must pay this just
tribute;--that in those six books of the annals he mastered the
simplicity, though he came far short of the elegance of tacitus.


end of book the second.





book the third.

the last six books of the annals.


    quum itaque multa ex taciti operibus deessent, ut nicoli
    voluntati morem gereret poggius, nil omisit intentatum, ut per
    monachum nescio quem e germania tacitum erueret.
     mehus, _praefat. ad lat. epistol. traversarii._




chapter i.

the character of bracciolini.


i. the audacity of the forgery accounted for by the mean opinion
bracciolini had of the intelligence of men.--ii. the character and
tone of the last six books of the annals exemplified by what is
said of sabina poppaea, sagitta, pontia and messalina.--iii. a few
errors that must have proceeded from bracciolini about the
colophonian oracle of apollo clarius, the household gods of the
germans, gotarzes, bardanes and, above all, nineveh.--iv. the
estimate taken of human nature by the writer of the annals the
same as that taken by bracciolini.--v. the general depravity of
mankind as shown in the annals insisted upon in bracciolini's
dialogue "de infelicitate principum".

i. there is a great difference between the first six books of the
annals and the last six books; the latter portion is more historical,
and less biographical than the first portion: there is an obvious
attempt to assimilate it as closely as possible to the work of
tacitus; and any material difference in the character of the two
productions is not to be detected at a superficial glance.
hence many most intelligent readers are led astray in believing
that the annals and the history of tacitus proceeded from the same
hand, from not sufficiently bearing in mind that whatever a
history may be, the general character must always be the same;
plots and intrigues being alike, as well as stratagems and
revolutions; also persons and passions: the reason is clear: man
ever remains the same, affording the same examples of virtues and
vices, and carrying on wars in the same way, according to interest
and ambition, while the most important events in which he plays a
part resemble in having their origin from trivial causes, as
rivers, even the mightiest, take their source from insignificant
springs.

but while nobody discerns any such material difference in the
character of the annals and the history of tacitus as to be struck
with wonder, everybody is filled with amazement at there being in
the two works two such very different conceptions of historical
composition. in the history only full light is thrown on important
events and leading characters: that this may shine the brighter
every common action is thrown into the shade, and every small
individual passed over unmentioned. but the pages in the last six
books of the annals are crowded with incidents, great and small,
and figures, good, bad and indifferent. contrary also to tacitus,
who disposes materials in a just order, arranging those together
that refer to the same thing at different times, the writer of the
annals speaks of cognate things, that should be associated,
separately, as they occur from year to year, thus reducing his
narrative from the height of a general history to the level of a
mere diary.

the audacity of the forgery is here something absolutely
marvellous;--and it never would have been attempted by any one who
was not made of the stuff of bracciolini: it was the stuff that
makes a forger: anyone with proper appreciation of men's
intelligence would not have dared to do this; but, instead of
regarding the majority of his kind as sagacious, or even more so
than they are, and knowing much, or more than they do,--as is the
case with well-disposed people,--bracciolini, who was far from
being of a benevolent nature, fell into the very opposite extreme,
of looking upon men as remarkably stupid and ignorant. nothing is
more common than meeting in his works with contemptuous
disparagements of his kind; he scoffs at human nature for its
deficiency of understanding; he does not hesitate decrying its
want of thought, as in his essay "de miseria humanae conditionis":
"we must at times recollect," says he, "that we are men, silly
and shallow in our nature":--"aliquando nos esse homines meminerimus,
hoc est, imbecillis fragilisque naturae" (p. 130); or, "i admit
the silliness of mankind to be great": "fateor--magnam esse humani
generis imbecillitatem" (p. 90); or, "knowledge is cultivated
by a few on account of the general stupidity": "quoniam communi
stultitia a paucis virtus colitur" (p. 9l): pretty well this for
one work. then opening his "historia disceptativa convivalis,"
the reader lights on him sneering at the "shallowness and silliness
of his age":--"haec fragilis atque imbecilla aetas" (p. 32). as in
his elaborate and carefully conned works, so in his epistles thrown
off on the spur of the moment,--as when he is inviting his friend
bartolomeo fazio to stay with him in florence, he continues: "though
i have lived in this city now for a great many years, from my youth
upwards, yet every day as if a fresh resident i am overcome with
amazement at the number of the remarkable objects, and very often
am roused to enthusiasm at the sight of those public buildings which
fools, from the stupidity of their understandings, speak of as erected
by supernatural beings":--"quamvis in ea jam pluribus annis ab ipsa
juventute fuerim versatus, tamen quotidie tamquam novus incola
tantarum rerum admiratione obstupesco, recreoque persaepe animum
visu eorum aedificiorum, quae stulti propter ingenii imbecillitatem
a daemonibus facta dicunt" (ep. ix. bartol. facii epist. p. 79, flor.
ed. 1745).

ii. with such a low notion of men's intelligence and the stupidity
of his age (though it was a clever one,--at least, so far as italy
was concerned, the country of which he had the closest knowledge
and with which he had the most constant intercourse), it is to be
expected,--quite natural, in fact, that he should have regarded
lightly the difficulties he had to encounter in his endeavours to
imitate tacitus; and though he must have been thoroughly conscious
that it was not in his power victoriously to surmount them, yet he
cared not, for he did not fear detection, viewing, as he did, with
such withering and lordly disdain the want of perspicacity which,
in his fancy, characterized his species. he worked on, then, as
best he could, with courage and confidence; every now and then
doing things that never would have been done by tacitus: the
story, for example, of sabina poppaea in the 14th book; tacitus
would have surely passed it over as, though having some relation
to the public, coming within the province of biography.
unquestionably, tacitus would have rejected as strictly
unhistorical the dark tale of murder and adultery of the tribune
of the people, sagitta, and the private woman, pontia, which has
no more to do with the historical affairs of the romans, than a
villainous case of adultery in the divorce court, or a monstrous
murder tried at the old bailey is in any way connected with the
public transactions of great britain. [endnote 231]

what history, then, we have in the last six books of the annals
does not remind us in its character of the history taken note of
by tacitus.

the tone and treatment, too, are not his.

the jesuit, rene rapin, in his comparisons of the great men of
antiquity (reflexions sur l'histoire, p. 211), may, with a violent
seizure of ecstacy, fall, like a genuine frenchman, into a fit of
enthusiasm over the description, as "exquisite in delicacy and
elegance" ("tout y est decrit dans une delicatesse et dans une
elegance exquise" says he), of the lascivious dancing of messalina
and her wanton crew of terpsichorean revellers when counterfeiting
the passions and actions of the phrenzied women-worshippers of
bacchus celebrating a vintage in the youth of the world, when the
age was considered to be as good as gold: the gay touches in the
lively picture may be introduced with sufficient warmth to
enrapture the chaste jesuit priest, and judiciously enough to
contrast boldly with the dreadful, tragic details of the shortly
ensuing death of the empress; but they are not circumstances that
would have ever emanated with their emotional particularities from
the solemn soul of tacitus. the passage is only another powerful
proof how absolutely ineffectual was the attempt of bracciolini to
render history after the style of the stern, majestic roman.

iii. every now and then, too, the most extraordinary errors with
respect to facts cannot be explained by the hypothesis that
tacitus wrote the annals; for there could not have been such
deviations from truth on the part of any roman who lived in the
time of the first caesars: on the other hand, the errors are just
of the character which makes it look uncommonly as if they were
the unhappy blunders of a mediaeval or renaissance writer such as
bracciolini. an instance or two will best illustrate what is
meant.

in the twelfth book lollia paulina is made to consult the
colophonian oracle of apollo clarius respecting the nuptials of
the emperor claudius: "interrogatumque _apollinis clarii
simulacrum_ super nuptiis imperatoris" (an. xii. 22). how could
this be? when strabo, who lived in the time of augustus, tells us
that in his day that oracle no longer existed, only the fame of
it, for his words are: "the grove of apollo clarius, in which
there used to be the ancient oracle":--[greek: "alsos tou klariou
apollonos, en ho kai manteion aen pote palaion"] (xiv. i. 27).
this is quite convincing that tacitus could not have written those
words.

there is another reason against tacitus having made the statement:
he must have been aware from personal knowledge that his
countrymen obtained all their oracular responses from water.
bracciolini might have known that this custom prevailed among the
romans during the time of the caesars, had he consulted lucian's
alexander or pseudomantis, melek (better known as porphyry), and,
above all, jamblicus, who, in his book upon egyyptian, chaldaean
and assyrian mysteries, speaks (iii. 11) of the habit among the
romans of "interpreting the divine will by water": [greek: di
hudatos chraematizesthai], and explains the manner how, "for in a
subterraneous temple" (by which, i presume, jamblicus means a
"sanctified cave or grotto") there was a fountain, from which the
augur drank," [greek: einai gar paegaen en oiko katageio, kai ap
autaes pinein ton prophaetaen.] how can we believe that tacitus
was ignorant of such an ordinary native ceremony, and one, too,
that must have come repeatedly within his ken?

another error is, apparently, very trifling, but it becomes quite
startling when we are to suppose that it was made by tacitus, an
accepted authority upon the people in question,--the ancient
germans of the first century of our aera:--that people who
(according to sanson's maps and geographical tables) inhabited
what was then known as "germany," namely, the country between the
danube and the rhine, with denmark, norway, sweden, the western
portion of poland and some part of the kingdom of hungary,--are
represented as having household gods, for we are told that if
italicus had had the spirit of his father (flavius, brother of
armin), he would have done what his parent did, wage war more
rancorously than any man, against his country and his "household
gods"; "si paterna italico mens esset, non alium infensius coutra
patriam ac _deos penates_, quam parentes ejus exercuisse"
(an. xv. 16). into this mistake tacitus could not possibly have
fallen, from being thoroughly acquainted with the manners of the
germans, as he has shown in his work on that subject: he knew that
that people had only one set of gods whom they worshipped publicly
in sacred groves and woods, but none corresponding to the roman
dei penetrales, privately worshipped at home.

we have read scarcely more than a page from the commencement of
that portion of the annals where the forgery began,--the eleventh
book,--before we find that a mistake is made about gotarzes being
the brother of artabanus: for he is described as having
"compounded poison for the particular purpose of killing his
'brother' artabanus and his wife and son": "necem fratri artabano
conjugique ac filio ejus praeparaverat" (an. xi. 8). artabanus was
the father, as may be seen in josephus: "not long after artabanus
died, leaving his kingdom to his son vardanes: [greek: "met' ou
polun de chronon artabanos telueta, taen basileian to paidi
ouardanae katalipon"] (antiq. jud. xx. 3, 4 in init). vardanes
(according to josephus), but (according to other writers) bardanes
was the brother of gotarzes; as was known to bracciolini who
speaks of "gotarzes revealing to his brother," meaning bardanes,
"a conspiracy of their countrymen which had been disclosed to
him": "cognitis popularium insidiis, quas gotarzes _fratri_
patefecerat" (an. xi. 9). it cannot be said that bracciolini was
unacquainted with josephus; for he follows him closely in the last
six books of the annals; further he mentions him in his letters,
for he says that he has been "a long while waiting for his works,"
(to make use of them in his forgery): "jamdiu expectavi josephi
libros," &c. (ep. iii. 28): his memory, notwithstanding, entirely
failed him with respect to the passage in question, or else he
paid no heed to it.

while he makes this misstatement about gotarzes and artabanus he
falls into another blunder with respect to bardanes: he circumscribes
the limit of his reign to less than one twelvemonth,--the year when
the secular games were celebrated which, according to his own account,
was the year 800 from the foundation of rome, or the year 47 of the
christian aera ("ludi saeculares octingesimo post romam conditam ...
spectati sunt." an. xi. 11).

soon after his accession bardanes, (according to the narrative we
have of him in the annals), found a rebel in his brother gotarzes,
who waged war against him, defeated him, and, gaining his kingdom,
had him assassinated by a body of parthians, who "killed him in
his very earliest youth while he was engaged in hunting and not
anticipating any harm:" "incautum venationique intentum interfecere
primam intra juventam" (an. xi. 10). all these circumstances are
made to occur in such rapid succession to each other that they
occupied only one year, if so much; for they are all shown as
taking place during the consulship of valerius asiaticus and
valerius messalla.

now let the reader turn to the life of apollonius of tyana by
philostratus. he will there see that the magician of cappadocia on
his arrival in babylon was told that bardanes had been reigning
two years and as many months; apollonius stopped in the palace of
the king twenty months; then he started on a tour to india; he
travelled about the asiatic peninsula for a considerable time;
next he went on a visit to the brahmins with whom he staid four
months; after that he returned to babylon, where he found bardanes
as he had left him, still king and in the enjoyment of excellent
health. it is necessary that i should substantiate this by
extracts from philostratus. in a conversation with one of the
king's courtiers apollonius asks the question: "what year that was
since bardanes had recovered his kingdom?" and received the reply
that it was "the third, two months of which they had already
reached": [greek: "poston de dae touto etos tae anaktaetheisae
archae; pritou, ephae, haptometha duo aedae pou maenes"] (i. 28):
in another conversation with damis apollonius says that he "is off
to india"; that he has been staying at the court "already a year
and four months"; though "the king will not let him take his
departure until the completion of the eighth month": [greek: age,
o dami, es indous iomen ... eniautos gar haemin aedae, kai
tettares ... oude anaesei haemas ... ho basilaeus proteron, ae ton
ogdoon telesai maena]: the biographer then speaking of the visit
to the brahmins, says that apollonius spent four months with
them": [greek: maenon tettaron ekei diatripsanti]: and "on his
return to babylon he found bardanes as he had left him," that is,
on the throne and in the enjoyment of health: [greek: es babylona
... anapleusai para ton ouardanon, kai tuchontes auton oion
egignoskon] (iii. 58).

we have proof positive here that bardanes sat on the throne of
babylon for at least four years and a half; quite contrary to the
account in the annals. philostratus is generally regarded as a
most reliable writer of antiquity; we may be, therefore, tolerably
certain, from the look out given us in the pages of the historian
of lemnos, that bardanes did not die, as we are told in the
annals, in his earliest youth by assassination after a short reign
of less than one year, but that he reigned long, lived to a good
old age, and died a natural death.

one more example of this kind, which almost seems to bring home
the forgery to bracciolini; and then we will pass on to other
matters (for the present).

nowhere in his works do i find that bracciolini makes any
reference to lucian or strabo, or even mentions their names. i
think if he had read them, he would have known better than to have
spoken of nineveh being in existence in the reign of the emperor
claudius, because this is the reverse of what we are told by
lucian and strabo. for all that, we hear in the annals of troops
"along their march capturing the city of nineveh, that most
ancient capital of assyria": "capta in transitu urbis ninos
vetustissima sedes assyriae" (an. xii. 13). in lucian's amusing
dialogue, entitled "charon," when mercury points out the tomb of
achilles on cape sigaeum and that of ajax on the rhoetaean
promontory, charon wants to see nineveh, with troy, babylon,
mycenae, and cleone, the following being the conversation; "i want
to point out to you," says mercury, "the tomb of achilles: you see
it on the sea? that's cape sigaeum in the troad: and on the
rhoetaean promontory opposite ajax is buried. char. those tombs, o
hermes, are no great sights. rather point out to me those renowned
cities, of which i have heard below,--nineveh, the capital of
sardanapalus, babylon, mycenae, cleone and that famous troy, on
account of which i remember ferrying across there such numbers
that for ten whole years my skiff was never high and dry and never
caught cold," (that being charon's fun, according to lucian's
conception, in conveying that all that long time his boat was
_in the water_ (hence "catching cold") from being perpetually
used: [greek: "thelo soi deixai ton tou achilleos taphon, horas
ton epi tae thalattae; sigeion men ekeino to troikon, antikru de
ho aias tethattai en to rhoiteio. char. ou megaloi, o hermae, oi
taphoi tas poleis de tas episaemous deixon moi aedae, has kato
akouomen taen ninon taen sardanapalou, kai babulona, kai mukaenas,
kai kleonas, kai taen ilion autaen, pollous goun memnaemai
diaporthmensas ekeithen, hos deka oloneon maede neolkaesai, maede
diapsuxai to skaphidion."] the reply that then follows of mercury
shows that not a remnant was left of nineveh in the very ancient
time of croesus, and that nobody even then knew of its site:
"nineveh, o ferryman, is quite destroyed, and not a trace of it is
left now, nor can you tell where it used to be": [greek: "hae
minos men, o porthmen, apololen aedae, kai ouden ichnos eti loipon
autaes oud an eipois hopou pot' ae"] (charon 23). strabo says the
same with respect to the destruction of nineveh: "the city of
nineveh was thereupon demolished simultaneously with the
overthrowal of the syrians: [greek: hae men oun ninos polis
aephanisthae parachraema meta taen ton suron katalusin"] (xvi. i.3),
--though to speak of the inhabitants as "syrians," at such a
juncture is hardly correct language on the part of strabo; it
should have been "_assyrians_," if justin is right in saying
that that people only took the name of _syrians_ after their
empire was at an end: "for thirteen hundred years," says he, "did
the assyrians, who were _afterwards called the syrians_,
retain their empire": "imperium assyrii, qui _postea syri dicti
sunt_, mille trecentis annis tenuere" (justin i. 2).

had bracciolini been acquainted with these things, they would have
made such an impression upon his mind that he could never have
forgotten them. but as he wrote ancient history in the fifteenth
century, and did not know what lucian and strabo had said of
nineveh, he took as an authority for his statement a most
indifferent historian who flourished towards the close of the
fourth century of our aera, ammianus marcellinus; for i know of
nobody but marcellinus, who makes this statement; nor is there
likely to be anybody else, because the statement is ridiculous. it
will be remembered that bracciolini recovered the work of ammianus
marcellinus: it is then reasonable to presume that he had read, if
not studied his history. indeed, there can be very little doubt
that it was marcellinus who misled him: for when he was setting
about the forgery and importunately soliciting niccoli to supply
him with books for that purpose in the autumn of 1423, ammianus
marcellinus was one of these authorities: in the letter dated the
6th of november that year, he says he was "glad that his friend
had done with marcellinus, and would be still more glad if he
would send him the book": "gratum est mihi te absolvisse
marcellinum, idque gratius si me librum miseris" (ep. ii. 7). we
may be certain the book, being "done with" by niccoli, was sent to
him on account of the importance of his having it, for the
carrying out of his undertaking; thus he makes tacitus commit the
same mistake as marcellinus committed,--that nineveh was in
existence in the time of the roman emperors: "in adiabena is the
city of nineveh, which in olden time had possessed an extensive
portion of persia"; "in adiabena ninus est civitas quae olim
persidis magna possederat" (xxiii. 6). tacitus lived a good three
hundred years before that historical epitomist of not much note or
weight; and could not, on his authority, have been dragged, like
his "discoverer" and student, bracciolini, into this monstrous
error.

iv. but it is in the estimate of human nature, and the invariable
disparagement pervading the delineation of the character of every
individual, in the last six books of the annals, that the italian
hand of bracciolini is unmistakably detected, and the roman hand
of tacitus not at all traceable. shakespeare makes iago say of
himself: "i am nothing if not critical,"--meaning censorious.
bracciolini might have said the same of himself. he was never so
much "at home," (by which i mean that he never seemed to have been
so completely "happy"), as when lashing the anti-pope felix,
filelfo, valla, george of trebizond, guarino of verona, or some
other great literary rival of whose fame he was jealous; carping
at others, whose intellectual attainments were at all commensurate
to his own, and accusing of foul enormities persons who were
possessors of rhetorical merit, as he accused the "fratres
observantiae," for no other reason that one can see except that
those interlopers in the monastic order (the "brothers of
observance" being a new branch of the franciscans) preached
capital sermons.

there is no getting at any insight as to his nature from the