
chapter i

common sense farming



the three things essential to all wealth production are land,
labor, and capital.

"the dry land" was created before there appeared the man, the
laborer, to work it. with his bare hands the worker could have
done nothing with the land either as a grazer, a farmer or a
miner. from the very first he needed capital, that is, the tools
to work the land.

the first tool may have been a pole, one end hardened in the fire,
or a combined hoe and axe, made by fastening with wythes, a
suitable stone to the end of a stick; but no matter the kind of
tool, or the means of producing it, it represented capital, and
the man who owned this tool was a capitalist as compared with the
man without any such appliance.

from the land, with the aid of labor and capital, comes wealth,
which in a broad way may be defined as something having an
exchangeable value.

before the appearance of money all wealth changed hands through
barter. the wealth in the world to-day is immeasurably greater
than all the money in it. the business of the world, particularly
between nations, is still carried on through exchange, the
balances being settled by money.

money is a medium of exchange, and should not be confounded with
wealth or capital; the latter is that form of wealth which is used
with labor in all production.

broadly speaking, wealth is of two kinds, dormant and active. the
former awaits the development of labor and capital, the latter is
the product of both.

labor is human effort, in any form, used for the production of
wealth. it is of two kinds--skilled and unskilled. the former may
be wholly mental, the latter may be wholly manual.

the successful farmer must be a skilled laborer, no matter the
amount of his manual work. the unskilled farmer can never succeed
largely, no matter how hard he works.

trained hands with trained brains are irresistible.

too many farmers live in the ruts cut by their great-great-
grandfathers. they still balance the corn in the sack with a
stone.

farming is the world's greatest industry. all the ships might be
docked, all the factory wheels stopped, and all the railroads
turned to streaks of rust, and still the race would survive, but
let the plow lie idle for a year and man would perish as when the
deluge swept the mountain tops.

the next census will show considerably over 6,000,000 farms in the
united states. farming is the greatest of all industries, as it is
the most essential. our government has wisely made the head of the
department of agriculture a cabinet officer, and the effect on our
farming interest is shown in improved methods and a larger output
of better quality.

the hap-hazard, unskilled methods of the past are disappearing.
science is lending her aid to the tiller of the soil, and the wise
ones are reaching out their hands in welcome.

business methods needed

as farming is our principal business, it follows that those who
conduct this vast and varied enterprise should be business men.

the farmer is a producer of goods, and so might be regarded as a
manufacturer,--the original meaning of the word is one who makes
things by hand. he is also a seller of his own products, and a
purchaser of the products of others, so that, to some extent, he
may also be regarded as a trader or merchant.

enterprise and business skill are the requisites of the
manufacturer and merchant. can the farmer succeed without them?

no business can prosper without method, economy, and industry
intelligently applied.

no man works harder the year round than does the american farmer,
yet too many are going back instead of advancing. in such cases it
will be found that there is enough hard work for better results,
and that the cause of failure is that the industry has not been
properly applied, and that economy has had no consideration.

economy does not mean niggardliness, or a determination to get
along without tools that your neighbor has purchased. a neglect to
secure the best tool needed might be classed as an extravagance, a
waste, if the tool in question could have added to the quality and
quantity of the output, without the expenditure of more labor.

business common-sense is taking the place of old-fashioned
conservatism and scientific methods are no longer sneered at as
"book-farming."




chapter ii

documents every farmer should understand



all property implies an owner. property is of two kinds, real and
personal. the former is permanent and fixed, the latter can be
moved.

every occupant of realty holds it through a deed, which carries
with it sole ownership, or through a lease which carries with it
the right to occupation and use in accordance with the conditions
as to time and the amount to be paid, set forth in the written
instrument.

a deed carries with it sole ownership, a lease covers the right of
use for a fixed period.

as to deeds

the purchaser of real estate, say a farm, should receive, from the
person selling the property, a written instrument, or conveyance
known as a deed.

the deed must show clearly that the title to or interest in the
property has been transferred from the seller to the buyer.

before the deed is signed and delivered, the buyer should know
that he is getting a clear title to the property described in the
conveyance.

in order to insure the accuracy of the title and thus avoid
subsequent complications and perhaps lawsuits, the paper should be
submitted to some good lawyer, or other person acquainted with
real estate law and the methods by which titles are traced from
the first owner to the present possessor.

title abstracts

in all the great business centers of the united states there are
title guarantee companies, who for a consideration--to be paid by
the seller--furnish an abstract of title, and insure its validity.

in smaller places the local lawyers know how to make up an
abstract and one should be employed. never trust the search of the
inexperienced.

an abstract of title is a memorandum taken from the records of the
office where deeds are recorded, and showing the history of the
title from the government up to the present time.

the seller should furnish the buyer with a certificate from the
proper county officer, showing whether or not all taxes have been
paid up to the last assessment.

in addition to this, before the money is paid and the deed
accepted, the purchaser should be satisfied that there are no
mortgages, liens, attachments or other claims against the
property.

if such claims exist and are known to the buyer, he may assume
them as a condition of the sale.

parties to a deed

the person selling the land and making the deed is known in law as
the grantor. the person buying the property is known as the
grantee.

a deed is a form of contract, and in order to have its terms and
statements binding on the maker, he must be twenty-one years of
age, or over, and he must be of sound mind.

the grantee need not be twenty-one, nor of sound mind in order to
make the terms of the deed binding on the grantor.

in some states, if the grantor be a married man, his wife must
sign the deed with him. this should be seen to, for without the
wife's signature the grantee will not have a clear title, for the
woman could still claim an interest in the property equal to her
dower right.

also, if the grantor is a woman, her husband, for the reasons
given, should join with her in the execution of the deed.

the preparation of a deed should not be left to the unskilled.

different deeds

there are three kinds of deeds, viz.: general warranty deeds,
special warranty deeds, and quit-claim deeds.

the general warranty deed, if it can be had, is the one every
purchaser should get.

in the general warranty deed the grantor agrees for himself, "his
heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns," that at the time
of making the deed he is lawfully in possession, "seized" is the
legal term, of the estate described in the deed, that it is free
from all incumbrance, and that he will warrant and defend the
grantee and his heirs and assigns against all claims whatsoever.

in the quit-claim deed the grantor conveys to the purchaser his
interest in or right to the property under consideration.

the quit-claim grantor does not guarantee the title to the
property, nor warrant the grantee against any other claims. he
simply, by the deed, quits his claim to the property.

the special warranty deed covenants and warrants only against the
acts of the grantor and those claiming title under him.

making a deed

after a deed is properly drawn, it is ready to be signed, sealed,
and delivered to the grantee.

if the wife of the grantor is to sign, her name should follow that
of her husband.

if one or both cannot write, the signature can be made in this
way:

            his
      george x jones.
           mark.

witness..............


in some states one or more witnesses are required to the signature
of the grantor; in others, witnesses are not necessary, except
where a "mark" is made.

an important part of a deed is the acknowledgment. this is the act
of acknowledging before a notary public, justice or other official
properly qualified to administer an oath, that the signatures are
genuine and made voluntarily.

the acknowledgment having been taken, the official stamps the
paper with his seal and signs it.

in some states the law requires that a wax or paper seal be
attached to the paper, while in others a circular scroll, made
with the pen, with the letters "l.s." in the center answer the
purpose.

when the foregoing essentials are complied with the deed must be
delivered to the grantee. the delivery is essential, for without
it the deed is of no value, even though every other requisite be
complied with.

a deed may be made for land on which full payment has already been
acknowledged, but if the grantor dies before the deed is
delivered, then the deed has no legal value.

a deed obtained by fraud, deceit or compulsion is void.

recording deeds

as soon as possible after the grantee has received the deed, he
should have it recorded.

in every county in the different states there is an officer, known
as register or recorder, whose duty it is to enter in regular
folios, or books, a copy of every deed or mortgage presented to
him. the document then becomes a part of the county records.

the grantee must pay the recording fees.

anyone, on paying the fee for copying and certifying, can obtain a
copy of any document that has been recorded in a register's
office.

if an original deed is lost, the certified copy of the register
has all the legality of the original.

all deeds and other papers of value should be carefully kept, so
that they may be available, if needed.

a small safe deposit box with a company that keeps such spaces for
rent, is often a wise investment.

keep all related papers in one package or envelope.

if there is one lawyer who attends to all your legal business, he
will be a good custodian of all papers of record, for he usually
has a fireproof safe.




chapter iii

other forms of deeds--mortgages



there is one condition under which the grantor does not turn over
or deliver the deed to the grantee after it is made. this is known
as a deed in escrow.

a deed "delivered in escrow" is when the document is placed with a
third party to be by him delivered to the grantee when a certain
time has elapsed or certain conditions have been fulfilled.

when the conditions have been complied with, the deed is given by
its custodian to the grantee, which is as legal as if it were
given by the grantor in person.

trust deeds

a trust deed is the form used to convey property to some person
who is entitled to its proceeds or profits.

this form of deed is often used to secure the payment of a debt.
in some states they take the place of mortgages.

where the trust deed is meant to take the place of a mortgage to
secure a debt payment, the property is deeded to a third party
known as a "trustee."

the trustee in this case is the agent for debtor and creditor, and
he must act impartially.

the trust deed specifies the character of the debt to be secured.
in case of failure to pay the debt as agreed on, the trustee may,
if so warranted, sell the property, and pay the obligation from
the proceeds.

the grantor in a trust deed, if not stipulated to the contrary, is
entitled to all the rents and profits of the property; for it
remains virtually his, until he has failed to fill his contract.

when the indebtedness secured by the trust deed has been paid, the
trustee must at once execute a paper known to law as a release
deed. when recorded this instrument discharges the lien.

as to mortgages

mortgages are of two kinds, real and chattel. the first is a lien
on real estate, the second on personal property.

a mortgage may be defined as a conveyance of property, personal or
real, as security for the payment of a debt, or it may be given as
a guarantee for the performance of some particular duty.

mortgage forms

when a mortgage is given as security for the payment of a debt,
the rule is to give a note for the payment of the amount involved.
the mortgage becomes in this case the security for the note's
payment.

in the body of the note it must be stated that it is secured by
mortgage.

the date of the note and mortgage should be the same.

the man who mortgages his property is the mortgagor.

the man to whom the mortgage is given is the mortgagee.

the form of the mortgage is the same as that of a deed, except
that it contains a clause called the defeasance, which states that
when the obligation has been met the document shall be void.

mortgages must be recorded

the forms for "signing, sealing and delivering" a mortgage, are
the same as with a deed.

a mortgage must be recorded the same as a deed, the mortgagee
paying the fees.

chattel mortgages are filed and recorded in the same way, except
that it is not usual to make copies of the instrument. they are
described in books prepared for the purpose.

a wife need not join her husband in making the note secured by a
mortgage, but if she agrees to the transaction it is necessary for
her to sign the mortgage; however, some states do not require
this.

payments

often a life insurance policy is used as security for the payment
of a mortgage.

the mortgagee, if there be buildings on the property, should see
that the buildings are insured and that the policy or policies are
made out in his name.

if the insurance policy is in the mortgagor's name he may collect
and keep the insurance money.

the mortgagor must meet, as stipulated, every payment of the
principal and interest.

failure to meet one payment can result in a legal foreclosure.

when a payment is made, the date and the amount must be entered on
the back of the note. this should be done in the presence of the
mortgagor.

if possible always pay the obligation by check.

if a payment is accepted on a mortgage and the amount is not
sufficient to meet the sum required, the interest is first settled
in full, the rest is credited to the principal.

when the full amount, with interest, is paid in, it becomes the
duty of the mortgagee to have the mortgage "discharged."

a complete settlement is when, all payments being made, the
mortgagee surrenders the note and its security, and causes to be
written by the register, on the margin of the copy in his books,
the words, "discharged," or "satisfied," affixing thereto his
official signature and the date.

assignments

a mortgage is regarded in law as personal property.

a mortgage need not remain in the hands of the mortgagee in order
to be valid. it can be sold like bonds, stocks or other property,
and there are men who deal only in that form of security.

in order to sell a mortgage, the owner must make, to the
purchaser, what is known as an "assignment of mortgage."

the assignment should be recorded in the same way as the original
mortgage, the assignee paying the fee.

redemption of mortgages

while the rule as to the redemption of mortgages remains the same
in some localities that it formerly was, the law in most places is
now more lenient.

now the mortgagor who has failed is usually given by law an
extension of time in which to make good the payment of principal
and interest.

lenders, when the interest is met, are content to let the mortgage
run on as an investment, though it will often be found, in such
cases, that it is better to make a new mortgage.

equity of redemption

where the payments on a mortgage have not been met and the
instrument has not been foreclosed, the mortgagor has still what
is known as an "equity of redemption."

in some states after the foreclosure of the mortgage and the sale
of the property there is still a period of redemption of from
sixty days to six years.

the mode of foreclosure differs in some states. the usual method
is to foreclose on an order from the court, and to have the sale
conducted by a court officer.

the proceeds from the sale are used to pay the principal,
interests and costs. if there is money left over it is paid to the
mortgagor, whose interests in the property are then at an end.

many people, not familiar with business methods, are inclined to
regard a mortgage as something of a disgrace, when, as a matter of
fact it is a most usual and honorable means of raising money for
the securing of a home or the conducting of a business.

nearly all of the great railroads of the country have been built
by the sale of the mortgage bonds, which are usually renewed when
due, and are sought out as a safe and sane form of investment.

the fact that a mortgage payment has to be met on a farm is often
in itself the strongest inducement to industry and economy.




chapter iv

wills



whether farmer, manufacturer, merchant or professional man, and
whether in youth, mid-age or declining years, every owner of
personal or real property, or both, should make a will.

if you have not made a will, get over the foolish notion that it
is a premonition of death, and do so at once.

a will is a written and signed declaration of the disposition one
wishes to have made of his property in the event of his death.

the maker of a valid will must be of sound mind and not less than
twenty-one years of age.

women, whether married or single, if of proper age, are competent
to make a will.

of two kinds

a will may be written or unwritten.

unwritten wills are known as "nun-cupative." nun-cupative wills
are employed only when through accident, or sudden seizure by a
fatal disease, the time necessary to write and sign a will cannot
be had.

the unwritten will must be authenticated by reliable and
unprejudiced witnesses, and generally it can dispose of personal
property only.

in the written will no precise form is necessary, though when
drawn by a lawyer it usually begins with some such form as: "i,
george brown, being of sound mind and good understanding, do make
and declare this to be my last will and testament", etc.

a will is not necessarily permanent. it may be cancelled or
changed in any way by the maker before his death, or a new will
can be made.

the last will cancels all preceding wills.

an addition to an existing will is known as a "codicil."

a man making a will is called a testator.

a woman making a will is called a testatrix.

limitations of wills

a man has a right to dispose of his property by will or gift as he
chooses, but if he is married the law compels him to consider the
rights of another.

the husband cannot, by will or otherwise, deprive his wife of her
"right of dower" in his real estate and appurtenances.

unless she chooses to accept, the wife need not accept other
property that is bequeathed her in lieu of dower.

the wife's dower interest in her husband's estate is a life
interest only. on her death it goes to the husband's heirs, as if
there had been no widow.

in some states there is no right of dower.

how to make a will

the will not only shows the purpose of the testator, but it serves
as a bar to litigation among the natural heirs.

any man or woman can write out his or her will, but unless quite
familiar with such work it is better to employ a lawyer for the
purpose.

the person named in the will to carry out the purpose of the
testator is known as the "executor".

no person, not twenty-one at the time the will is proved can act
as an executor.

neither a convict, an imbecile, nor one known to be a drug fiend
or an habitual drunkard, is eligible for the post of an executor.
if an executor be appointed against his will, the law does not
compel him to serve.

there must be at least two witnesses to a will, some states
require three.

the witnesses need not know the contents of the will, but they
must understand before signing that it is a will, and they must
see it signed by the testator.

under the common law the will is void if the witnesses are
beneficiaries.

in some states a will so witnessed is valid, except that the
witnesses cannot receive their legacies.

all the witnesses should sign at the same time and add their
addresses.

if an heir at law, say a child, is not mentioned in the will, the
law assumes that he was forgotten by the testator and generally
gives the share the heir would be entitled to if there were no
will.

at the end of the will the testator, in the presence of the
witnesses, should write his name in full.

an executor's duties

an executor is the legal representative of the testator. it is his
duty to see that the provisions of the will are carried out.

no man is qualified to act as executor who is not competent to
make a will. executors, unless relieved by the provisions of the
will, are required to file bonds, proportioned to the value of the
estate, for the faithful performance of their duties.

should there be no executor named in the will, or if the person so
named refuses to act, or if he dies or resigns, the court will
appoint a person to act in his place.

the executor appointed by the court is known or called an
"administrator with the will annexed."

in some states the court having jurisdiction of wills and estates
of deceased is known as "the probate," in others it is called the
"surrogate's court," and in still others, "the orphan's."

administrators and their duties

if a man, owning property, dies without making a will, the judge
of the proper court will appoint an administrator to settle the
estate.

this is the method of procedure:

1. a person, interested in getting the estate settled, goes before
the proper judge and asks him to appoint an administrator.
2. the administrator must give the same bond as an executor. their
duties are the same.
3. in settling the estate the administrator is governed by the
law, and by the special directions of the officer having
jurisdiction in such matters.
4. he must make a careful list of all the property belonging to
the estate. the value of the personal property is estimated by men
specially appointed by the court for the purpose and known as
"appraisers".
5. the administrator must account for every item of property that
comes into his possession.
6. all debts of deceased must be first paid, including funeral
expenses. if the proceeds of the personal property are not
sufficient for this purpose, the administrator may, if there be
real estate, sell the whole or part of it, on an order from the
court.

debts

debts must be paid in an order prescribed by law. the following is
the usual order:

1. funeral expenses and expenses of last illness.
2. the widow's allowance or award.
3. debts due the state or municipality.
4. claims of other creditors.

whatever property is left, after paying these obligatory sums, is
divided among the rightful heirs under the direction of the court,
and in the manner provided by law.

the administrator must advertise, in one or more county papers the
fact that he has been appointed to settle the estate of the
deceased, whose name is given, and he must ask that all claims be
presented within a given period, usually fixed at six months.

when the estate is settled to the satisfaction of the court, the
same authority releases the administrator and his bondsmen.

all the fees connected with the settlement are regarded as debts
and must be paid from the proceeds of the estate before closing.

the final settlement

when the debts are paid and the residue divided among the heirs,
the administrator files his account. if it is allowed the case
ends.

the parties of interest in an estate may agree to settle it out of
court. this saves expense, but it is not the safest way.




chapter v

letter writing



what has been said about deeds and mortgages applies not only to
the farmer, but also to every owner of a building lot. the same
may be said of wills. they have a business interest for the town
as well as for the country dweller.

business letters

the purpose of this book being "strictly business," no attempt
will be made to instruct the reader in anything not connected with
the subject under consideration.

social, friendly, and such letters are matters for individual time
and taste, and no rule can be laid down for their writing, but the
business letter is a different matter, and one which deserves
special consideration from every man or woman who receives an
order by mail, or who sends one.

to write a good business letter is no mean accomplishment, and
although a gift with some, it can be acquired by all.

a letter is, in a way, a testimonial of the character and ability
of the writer.

the purpose of a business letter is to express just what you want
and no more.

any man with a good common school education, and a little patient
practice, can soon learn to write as good a business letter as the
college graduate.

correct spelling may not be general, but it is certainly
desirable.

letter writing, as in the preparation of other papers, has its own
well-recognized forms, and these may be easily learned.

every properly constructed business letter should consist of the
following parts:

  1. where written from.
  2. when written.
  3. to whom written.
  4. address.
  5. salutation.
  6. introduction.
  7. purpose of letter.
  8. complimentary ending.
  9. signature.

the heading

the letter should begin by giving the address of the writer,
followed by the date on which it was written. this will enable the
recipient to direct his reply.

if from a city, the street and number should be given.

if many letters are written it will be convenient to have the
permanent address of the writer printed.

the writing should be plain, and there should be no doubt in the
mind of the reader as to the proper spelling of the address and
signature.

avoid the hieroglyphics which some vain men adopt in signing their
names. it may be fanciful, but it does not imply consideration for
the time and patience of strangers.

the following forms will serve to illustrate the type of heading
used in ordinary business letters:

                     1

     124 smith st., brownsville, mass.
                      september 4, 1910.
mr. john smith,
  doylestown, penna.
dear sir:

                     2

                        leroy, mass.,
                     september 5, 1910.
messrs. brown and jones,
  denver, col.
gentlemen:

                     3

  4 seminole st., fort smith, ark.
                  september 6, 1910.
mrs. mary j. robinson,
  lansing, cal.
dear madam:

the "mr.," "mrs.," "madam," and "miss" are titles of courtesy and
should not be omitted. the abbreviation "esq." for esquire is
sometimes used; but the two titles mr. and esq. should never be
used with one name, as "mr. john smith, esq."

if a man is known by a military or other title, always use it, but
never precede it with "mr." nor follow it with "esq."

clergymen should always be addressed as "rev.," the abbreviation
for reverend. if he is a doctor of divinity, add d.d. to the name,
as "rev. john smith, d.d."

medical doctors may be addressed as "dr. john smith," or "john
smith, m.d."

the greeting

the greeting or salutation is a term of courtesy or esteem used in
addressing the one to whom the letter is sent.

"sir" is the formal greeting, and is used in addressing officials,
or any strange male person. "sirs," or "gentlemen" may be used in
the plural. "dear sir," or "my dear sir," is the usual form of
greeting when a business letter is addressed to an individual.

where the writer is acquainted with the person addressed, the
usual form of greeting is "dear mr. smith."

the letter itself

if writing in response to a letter received, the writer should
begin in some such way as this:

mr. thomas brown,
  newburg, n. y.
my dear sir:

  your favor of the second inst. is just to hand. in reply permit
me to state, etc., etc.

this should be followed by the necessary statement, set forth in
clear, simple words.

be sure of yourself.

the secret of good writing is clear thinking.

ending the letter

there is much in the proper ending of a letter. in the ordinary
business letter the usual ending may be, "yours truly," "yours
very truly," or "yours respectfully." other endings used in
writing to business acquaintances are, "yours sincerely," or "very
sincerely yours," or you may substitute the words "cordially" or
"heartily" for "sincerely."

signing the letter

the name of the writer should be so clear and distinct as to leave
no doubt as to the spelling.

the name should always be written in the same way.

if your name is george w. brown, do not write it at one time as
here given, and again as g. washington brown, or g. w. brown.

adopt one form and stick to it.

if you are writing for a firm or for another as clerk or
secretary, always sign the firm name, and below it your own name
preceded by the word "per," meaning "by" or "through."

the materials

never use scraps of paper or soiled paper to write on if better
can be had. the materials of a letter affect the receiver,
particularly if a stranger, just as one is affected by the garb of
a stranger before he speaks.

use a good pen and black ink.

fold your paper so that it will fit the envelope.

avoid blots and erasures; they indicate carelessness or unbecoming
haste.

address your letter distinctly.

here is a good form:

       mr. george w. white,
                        boston,
1101 sioux st.             mass.

letters of introduction

at some time or another one has to write a letter of introduction,
and sometimes he has had to pay for it.

if you should give such a letter to a man to introduce him to
another with whom you trade, the law has held that the introducer
is responsible for any reasonable bills the introduced may
contract with the receiver of the letter.

never give a letter of introduction to a man you are not sure of.

in addressing a letter of introduction which is to be handed in
person, do it in this way:

         mr. george w. brown,
                   washington, d. c.
  introducing
      mr. henry wilson.

this shows on its face the nature of the communication.

here is a good form:

       111 payne ave., montrose, ill.
                    september 27, 1910.
mr. norman r. lloyd,
  chicago, ill.
dear mr. lloyd:

     this will introduce my esteemed
friend mr. thomas t. fletcher, of this
town. mr. fletcher contemplates opening
a drug store in chicago. should he do so
he will prove an acquisition to your city.
any favor you can render him will be much
appreciated by,
             yours faithfully,
                     george w. brown.

recommendations

every man of standing and every employer of labor is at times
called on to certify to the character, or to give a testimonial to
some esteemed employee who is about to seek his fortune in another
place.

if you are about to hire a stranger, it adds to your confidence
and to his chances if he have a testimonial as to character and
fitness from his last employer, or from some man whose word you
value.

the letter of recommendation is usually of a general character and
not addressed to any particular. it should open in this way:

"to whom it may concern."

follow this with your testimonial and sign it.

titles

the president of the united states is addressed as:
"his excellency,"
  william h. taft,
    executive mansion,
      washington, d. c.

cabinet officers, senators, congressmen, members of the
legislature, and mayors of cities are usually addressed as "hon.,"
the abbreviation of honorable.

the title "hon." like "esq." is often misused. after all titles of
courtesy are not obligatory, unless we regard the unwritten law of
custom in such matters as binding.

the very best kind of a letter, and perhaps the hardest to write,
is that in which the writer appears to be talking to us face to
face.




chapter vi

bills, receipts and accounts



try to understand clearly the meaning of all the business terms
you have to use.

the terms "bill" and "invoice" usually mean the same thing, that
is, a "bill of sale." this applies to goods sold, or services
rendered.

the merchant sends you an itemized invoice of the goods you
ordered and he has shipped.

the carpenter sends you an itemized bill of the work done by your
order.

such a document should be regarded not as a "dun," but rather as a
record of the contract or transaction.

in the foregoing case the merchant and the carpenter are the
creditors, the recipient of the goods or work is the debtor.

bills for goods

in writing out a bill the date is the first thing to be
considered. this should be the same in form as a business letter.

this form will serve as an illustration:

                    glenwood, n. j.
                     october 1, 1910.
robert brown
  to george l. white, dr.
sept 2. for 25 lbs. sugar, at .06 . . .$1.50
  "  6.  "  30 lbs. ham, at .20 . . . . 6.00
  " 14.  " 100 lbs. flour, at .03-1/2 . 3.50
                                        ----
           received payment,          $11.00

signature on payment

wholesale houses send such bills as soon as the goods are shipped
or delivered, though the payment, as per agreement, is not to be
made for thirty, sixty or ninety days.

where there is a running account, that is, frequent orders, with
total payments never completed, it is customary for the seller, at
the beginning of a calendar month to send to the creditor a
"statement." this statement does not repeat the items of the bills
rendered, its purpose being to show the balance due to date.

bills for labor

where a mechanic or laborer is employed by the day at a fixed
wage, the length of time and dates should be given.

                         richmond, va.
                       november 3, 1910.
charles m. pratt,
   to john smith, dr.
     to 4 days, from oct. 1st to 4th
       inclusive, at $2.00..........$8.00
     to 2 1/2 days, oct. 10th, 11th
       and 12th....................  5.00
     to 3 days, oct. 17th, 18th and
       19th .......................  6.00
                                    ------
           received payment,        $19.00
                            signature.

this bill is just as transferable as a mortgage. if for any reason
mr. smith should decide to sell it, say to robert brown, he should
make the following endorsement across the back:

  "in consideration of ------ dollars, the
receipt of which is hereby acknowledged, i
do hereby sell and assign to robert brown,
the written account, which is justly due
from the within named charles w. pratt,
and i hereby authorize the said robert
brown to collect the same.
                        "john smith."
"newburg, n. y.
   november 1, 1910."

regarded simply from a business viewpoint and without considering
ethics, "honesty is the best policy."

bills, where possible, should be promptly paid.

prompt payment is a guarantee of credit and credit is the heart if
not the soul of business.

never, if it can be avoided, buy goods on the installment plan.

be sure to get a receipt for all payments you make, and be equally
sure to keep the receipt where you can find it.

examine all bills and invoices; compare them with the goods
received, and no matter what your faith in the seller's care and
honesty, calculate for yourself the price of each item, and be
sure that the total is correct.

discount in trade

it is a business custom, when a bill is paid before it is due, to
allow a discount. this may be the legal rate of interest, or any
percentage agreed on in advance.

sometimes wholesale merchants or manufacturers grant esteemed
customers, in consideration of prompt payments, a discount from
the regular prices. this is known as "trade discount."

we often read of two or more discounts. a store keeper buys a bill
of goods for $350 and is granted 20% and 5% from the selling
price.

this does not mean a discount of 25% as the uninitiated might
think. the 20% is deducted from the $350, that is, $70, leaving
$280. then the 5%, $14, is deducted from this, leaving $260.

partial payments are not endorsed on the bill. the receipt is
written on a separate piece of paper. it differs from the usual
receipt in that the one is "in full payment" and the other "on
account."

receipt no bill before it is actually paid.

some one has translated the letters "c. o. d." into "come omejitly
down." the collect on delivery usually accompanies goods sent by
express.

forms of receipts

a receipt for a partial payment:

                leavenworth, kansas.
                     december 7, 1910.
  $75.00
    received from charles long seventy-five
  dollars on account.
                        henry s. somers.

a receipt in full:

                         san diego, cal.
                          july 27, 1910.
  $260.75
    received from n. o. taylor, two hundred
  and sixty 75-100 dollars, in full payment
  to date.           samuel g. novris.

another form:

                           portland, me.
                         october 20, 1910.
  $40.00
    received from thomas moore, ten cords
  of hardwood, at $4.00 a cord, the sum to
  be applied to his account.
                           daniel forman.

in payment of rent:

  $17.00
    received from william forbes seventeen
  dollars in full payment of rent of premises
  no. 24 west street, for the month ending
  october 31, 1910.
                          philip f. ross.

where one person pays for another:

                wilmington, del.
                  august 17, 1910.
  $80.00
    received from alfred thompson eighty
  dollars to apply to the account of hiram o.
  wells.
                   baker jones & co.,
                       per, s. n. thorp.

receipts and other documents signed with a mark x should be
witnessed.

payment on a note:

                bridgeport, conn.
                      july 1, 1910.
  $150.00
    received from casper n. work one
  hundred and fifty dollars to apply on the
  payment of his note to me for six hundred
  dollars, dated march 8, 1910.
                       ruben hoyt.

the maker of the note should, in addition to getting his receipt,
have the amount of his payment endorsed on the back of the note by
the holder.

where a receipt is given to the administrator of an estate his
position should be named as "robert fields, administrator of the
estate of john jones, deceased."

what is an order?

an order is a command or instruction by one person to another to
do a stated thing.

an order may be given for the delivery of goods or the payment of
cash.

this is the usual form:

                       dayton, ohio.
                       august 3, 1910.
  mr. g. w. mcbride:
    please deliver to edward lott goods
  from your store to the amount of ten dollars,
  and charge to my account.
                       f. t. leroy.

this would be an order for cash:

                      holden, ind.
                      june 18, 1910.
  $30.00
    mr. p. t. mayhew. please pay to thomas
  jackson thirty dollars and charge same
  to my account.
                     f. r. wilson.

a due bill

the customary form of a due bill is:

                    durham, n. c.
                       may 1, 1910.
  $10.00
    due george smith ten dollars, payable
  in merchandise from my store.
                         s. t. long.




chapter vii

who should keep accounts



to have any value, business accounts, whether of a great or a
small concern, must be accurately kept.

every man and woman, having unsettled dealings with others, should
keep some sort of book accounts.

storekeepers must keep accounts, and every farmer and mechanic,
who would know just what he owns and what he has spent during the
past month and year, should keep an exact account of every cent
received and paid out.

lawyers and doctors know how to keep accounts, or if they do not
they are neglecting their own side of their professional duties.

workers, skilled and unskilled, and even the hired girl who is
paid by the month, should keep a record of the compensation
received, and how the whole or the part has been expended.

no woman can be called a really good housekeeper who does not know
to a penny what has become of the money she has received for the
upkeep of her establishment, whether she have a score of servants
or does all her own work.

in order to keep such accounts, as have just been indicated, it is
not necessary to be a trained bookkeeper, or to know anything more
about the art than a good common school education gives.

another word as to the farmer. i am not thinking in this
connection of the old-time, deep-in-the-ruts farmer, who never
learns and knows nothing to forget, but of that wide-awake
producer who tries to keep up with the times.

not only should the farmer keep cash accounts, the form may be
quite simple, but all his business affairs should be kept in the
best possible trim.

personal agreements without some kind of writing to back them up,
are dangerous.

verbal contracts feed the lawyers.

all transactions involving labor or money should be recorded in
black and white.

don't trust to your memory.

don't rely on the memory of another.

an account with crops

every farmer should keep an account with each crop he raises and
even with every field he cultivates.

against the farm should be charged--

1. its annual rental value.
2. what all the labor would cost if hired.
3. new machinery.
4. wear, tear and repair of old machinery.
5. taxes.
6. insurance.
7. doctor's bills.
8. interest on mortgage if any.
9. the cost of fodder, fuel, etc., consumed.

the farm should be credited with--

1. the rent.
2. the cost of everything produced and consumed on place.
3. the farm products sold.
4. the stock sold.
5. increased value of stock.
6. increased value of property, if any.


such accounts you say will cause trouble; well, you cannot do
anything of value without trouble. the question is will the effort
pay? those who keep such accounts say it does, and they are
usually the successful, progressive farmers.

working-men's accounts

the working man, skilled or unskilled, and the working man's wife
as well, should keep some form of cash book that will show from
week to week the receipts and expenditures.

one can be thrifty without being miserly.

where did the money go?

look at your book, where every cent expended has been set down,
and you will be surprised to find how the little sums total up.

look over the list of little things bought and you will be
surprised to see how many were not needed.

here is a simple form for a home record:

             cash received
1910.
jan. 2. balance on hand.........$45.50
  "  3. work for mr. jones....... 1.75
  "  3. smith paid bill......... 13.75
  "  9. work for mr. brown....... 7.50

             cash paid
1910.
jan. 2. two shirts...............$1.50
  "  3. to wife for house........ 8.50
  "  4. doctor c's. bill......... 6.00
  "  5. fare to troy............. 2.25
  "  6. horse car................  .20
  "  6. postage..................  .06
  "  7. church contribution...... 1.00
  "  8. shoes mended............. 0.60
  "  9. newspaper bill........... 1.00


never "lump" what you receive or what you spend.

set down each item separately, even to one cent.

when you have filled out each page of "received" and "paid" foot
it up and carry it to the next page set apart for the purpose.

an account book will cost but a few cents. use the left-hand side
for receipts and the right for expenditures.

at any time the excess of the left hand over the right should show
the amount on hand.

strike a balance at least once a month.

other records

never mix up another's accounts with your own.

john smith, treasurer of some church, society, or club, is a
different person before the law from john smith, the trader or
mechanic.

funds not your own, and which may be added to or decreased from
time to time, as in the case of a society, say like the odd
fellows, should be kept in the bank not as john smith's but as the
funds of "john smith, treasurer of washington lodge 110,
independent order of odd fellows," or whatever the name of the
society, club, or church may be.

in the same way, "a treasurer's book" should be kept and all the
receipts and expenditures carefully recorded.

copies

if a business proposition is made to another by mail, or if you
hand another in writing your proposition as to a certain contract
you are willing to undertake, for the consideration named, be sure
to keep a copy of the letter or contract; such a precaution may
save trouble.




chapter viii

as to banks



no instrument of trade has done so much or is more essential to
the safe and progressive business of the world today than the
bank.

every department of business, in our modern civilization, must
keep in touch with the bank.

money is the blood of trade and the banking system is its heart.

the bank is as necessary to the thrifty farmer as it is to the
greatest railroad or the most wide-spread trust.

banks are depositories for money not in circulation.

banks have facilities for the safe-guarding of money which the
ordinary business man could not provide for himself.

instead of running the risk of paying bills with money carried
about on his person, the business man, and every man with ready
money should follow his example, deposits his money in a
convenient bank, for which he receives a proper voucher in the
shape of a credit in a deposit book.

when he pays a bill, he draws a check for the amount, payable to
the order of his creditor. this check, when endorsed by the
receiver and paid by the bank, is in itself a receipt for the
money.

national banks

as i propose to say something about savings banks in another
chapter, the present will be devoted to what are known as "banks
of deposit."

banks of deposit are either national, state, or private.

a national bank is, as the name implies, chartered and
incorporated by the government, with special privileges and
restrictions.

the government in the organizing of national banks had in mind the
protection of the public without unduly limiting the profit of the
stockholders.

the sum the stockholders must contribute to the establishment of a
national bank varies according to the population and the business
importance of the place in which the bank is to be located.

the capital must exist in a prescribed form.

certain forms of investment are prohibited, as for instance the
ownership of real estate, except under certain restrictions.

this is done that the national bank may be able to convert its
securities into cash in the shortest order.

in consideration of a prescribed amount of united states bonds,
deposited with the treasury in washington, the government issues
to the national bank a prescribed sum in printed bank notes of
varying denominations.

if the bank should close for any reason, the bank notes or their
equivalent must be returned, when the bonds deposited as security
are released.

every bank must have a board of directors, a president and a
cashier. receiving and paying tellers, with bookkeepers, and many
clerks are necessary to carry on the business of a large bank.

in addition, the national banks are under the supervision of
regularly appointed government inspectors.

a national bank may fail, but its notes are still "as good as
gold."

banks as lenders

the bank not only receives money on deposit, but it loans money
under certain conditions.

many merchants, builders, contractors and others often find it
necessary to borrow money in order to carry on their business
successfully.

if a man's business reputation is good, and the banks keep well
posted in such matters, he may secure a loan on his own note,
though even in such cases the name of a good endorser is required.

if in addition to his note the borrower can offer security in the
way of bonds of good character, or other reliable collateral, he
can usually be accommodated.

of course, the banks charge interest for loans. they also make
collections on notes and other commercial paper and they issue
foreign and domestic bills of exchange.

every man with a sum large or small in excess of his expenditures,
should open a bank account. even if not in business this will
encourage thrift and lead to good business habits.

interest on deposits

some banks, particularly those known as "state" or "private," and
national banks in smaller communities, allow interest on deposits.
this interest varies with the demand for money, but in the eastern
states it seldom goes over four per cent.

it is well to know when interest begins and ends.

if the dates set by the bank for reckoning interest are the first
day of january, april, july and october, money deposited march
31st will begin to draw interest next day, but if deposited april
2nd, it would not begin to draw interest till july 1st.

but if you have the money and would insure its safety, deposit it
at once regardless of time or interest.

if a depositor withdraws his money before the day when interest is
due, he forfeits the interest. but banks vary as to that.

check and deposit books

every depositor is given a book in which the teller or cashier
credits him on the left-hand side with the amount deposited. other
deposits are treated in the same way, and at proper times, if
interest is allowed, it is added as a deposit.

the depositor can provide his own check book, and have it printed
in any color he pleases, with the name of himself and business on
the margin. the bank, however, will supply loose bank checks of
its own, or it may provide them in book form, with stubs, or a
space on which the number, amount and purpose of the check may be
noted for the drawer's information.

"writing up" of the deposit book is leaving it with the proper
officer at the bank--a receipt for the book is never taken. it is
returned with all the checks received, and their amount footed up
on the right hand or debit page, and the balance on hand shown.

every depositor should know from the record on the check stubs
exactly how his account stands with the bank.

take care that you do not overdraw.

keep your own record of your own money.

commercial deposit banks

in the commercial banks of our large cities no interest is
allowed, nor could it be easily calculated where a score of
deposits may be made in a week and a hundred checks drawn in a
day.

the depositor in such a bank is free to check out his funds as he
pleases.

before opening an account there is more than money needed from the
depositor. if unknown, he must satisfy the bank of his character,
which is best done through the introduction of one known to both.

some banks make a charge for deposits, where a man makes a
convenience of them by depositing money which he checks out in a
short time.

a depositor, when opening an account with a bank is required to
place his signature in a book kept for the purpose. until the bank
officer, the paying teller, becomes familiar with the signature on
the check, he verifies it by comparing it with that in the book.

how to prepare a check

a check may be defined to be "a written order on a bank directing
it to pay a certain sum of money to the person named in the check
or to his order, and signed by a depositor."

so long as the purpose is clearly conveyed in the writing no
particular form of words is necessary, nor need the paper on which
the check is written be the regular printed form properly filled
in.

the "drawer" is the one who makes the check.

the "payee" is the one for whom the check is made.

in making a check, the best plan is to fill out the stub first,
and from the data on it make out the check. this tends to
accuracy.

be sure to number your check, beginning with i.

be sure that the number on the stub is the same as on the check.

a person having money in bank and wishing to draw for his own use,
makes his check payable to "self" or to "cash."

usual form of check:

           first national bank.   no. 27
            kingston, vt., oct. 13, 1910.
      pay to order of john smith
      seventy-five 75/100  ------ dollars.
      $75.75               george f. brown.

it is proper form to specify on the face of the check the purpose
for which it is given, but while this is permissible it is not
usual.

write the amount of the check first in words then in figures. this
makes more certain the amount.

always begin first word of amount close to left-hand side of
check; when the whole sum is written down draw a heavy stroke
along the line to the word "dollars."

when a check is made payable to john smith or order, john smith
must sign his name on the back of the check--left-hand end and
about an inch from the top.

never sign a check until you are ready to collect, or to bank it.

the payee can endorse the check to another by writing on the back
as follows:

      pay to the order of
               thomas brown.
                            john smith.

a check payable to "bearer" may be negotiated by any one. when
such checks are presented by a stranger, at the bank of the maker,
the paying teller always insists that the stranger be identified.

never make a check payable to "bearer" if it can be avoided.

sometimes checks are dated ahead, for reasons satisfactory to the
maker and payee.

a check drawn on august 5th, but dated august 20th cannot be
collected till the latter date.

never date a check ahead unless you are positive that you will
have the money in bank to meet it on the day named.

never, if you can avoid it in trade, receive a post-dated check.

cash or deposit your checks as soon as possible after they are
received.

if the bank should fail, while you are holding the check, the
maker cannot be held for the loss.

certificates of deposit

often when a depositor is travelling, he finds it convenient to
carry with him a form of paper that is as good as cash, and much
better in the event of loss.

banks will issue "certified checks" to depositors. these checks
are stamped by the bank "certified" with the date and officer's
signature attached.

on issuing such a check, the bank debits the receiver's account
with the amount, and so can guarantee the payment whenever or
wherever presented.

such a check may be received with as much certainty of its value
as if it were a bank bill.

when a person places money in a bank with no intention of checking
it out for some time to come, he may have issued to him a
"certificate of deposit."

while holding this certificate he cannot check against the money
in the bank.

the holder of a certificate of deposit may transfer it.

the money may be paid in part by the bank, if the certificate is
presented, and the amount is endorsed on the back.

to withdraw all the money the certificate must be surrendered.

use of checks

there is no form of commercial paper in such general use as the
check.

the total of all the checks in use at some seasons is far more
than the total of all the money in all the banks.

checks are balanced in the money centers through what are known as
clearing houses. in these a bank is charged with checks against it
and credited with those in its favor.

the differences are settled by cash.

often a few thousand dollars will settle check accounts amounting
to millions.

if by any chance you should receive a check in which your name is
misspelled, or not given as you write it, endorse the check
exactly as the name is written on the face, then add your name in
the regular way.




chapter ix

savings banks



while of national importance, savings banks are chartered by the
respective states in which they exist, and as such are distinctly
local institutions.

unlike the national, the savings bank is not established as a
money-making corporation.

the ostensible and actual purpose of the savings bank is to
encourage people of small means to save.

the savings bank provides a safe place for the care of such
deposits, and it pays such rates of interest on such deposits as
are warranted by the earnings of its investments after paying the
expenses incident to the proper conduct of its officers.

when a savings bank receives authorization to act, through a
charter from the state, the organizers choose a board of directors
and the proper officers.

usually the officers occupying positions of trust and
responsibility are required to give bonds for the proper discharge
of their duties.

how business is conducted

with all the legal conditions complied with, and a suitable office
provided, the savings bank is ready for business.

some savings banks will receive on deposit any sum from five cents
to five thousand dollars.

other banks will not receive less than one dollar at a time, nor
more than a thousand.

we have heard of "penny savings banks," but they are rarely
chartered, and are organized, only to encourage thrift among
children.

fractional parts of a dollar are not usually reckoned as drawing
interest.

some banks require as much as three, four or five dollars before
allowing interest.

savings banks in the eastern states pay from three to four per
cent. in the west it is sometimes as high as six.

each bank has certain dates at which calculation of interest
begins. as a rule this is january 1st, april 1st, july 1st, and
october 1st.

money deposited at any time between these dates does not draw
interest till the beginning of the next quarter.

but never mind the interest.

the best time to make a deposit is when you have the money.

the bank is safer than your pocket.

how to deposit

count your money carefully and make a memorandum of the amount
before giving to the savings bank to deposit.

hand the money to the officer--usually "the receiving teller"--
authorized to receive it.

the teller writes down the name, age, occupation and residence of
the depositor.

if money is deposited in the name of one under legal age, the
names of the parents and the birthplace of the minor are also
recorded.

the adult depositor must write his name in a book provided by the
bank for the signature of clients.

when these conditions are complied with, the depositor receives a
memorandum book, known as a "deposit book", in which, with his
name and date, is written the amount of his first deposit.

the deposit book must be carefully guarded, for without its
presentation at the savings bank money cannot be drawn. you cannot
check against your savings bank account, as with a commercial
bank.

how the account grows

after the first account is opened the rest is easy.

on the second, as on all subsequent visits, the deposit book, with
the amount to be entered, is handed to the receiving teller. he
counts the money, makes a record of it for his own use, enters it
on your book as a deposit, and hands the book back. that is all.

whenever interest is due it is written down in the book as if it
were a cash deposit.

the interest, if desired, will be paid in cash, but if allowed to
remain, it begins at once to earn interest for itself.

interest grows like a rolling snow ball. on such small beginnings
great fortunes have been built.

savings banks keep a reserve, made up of earnings in excess of
interest and all expenses.

this reserve earns money.

the money so earned is reckoned as a net profit, and it may be
distributed, and usually is, among its depositors as a "dividend."

the limit of deposit

different banks have different limits of deposit, that is fixed
sums beyond which they will not receive.

the limit is from one thousand to five thousand dollars.

when the fortunate depositor has reached the limit with one
savings bank, there is no law to prevent his opening another
account with another, or with any number of similar banks.

remember the savings banks are not meant for capitalists, but for
small depositors.

after deposits and interests have reached a total of $1,600, the
interest will not go on earning interest, but will be regarded
simply as a deposit.

this is in compliance with law.

depositors, posted as to the law, open another account with
another bank, and keep on till the interest limit is reached.

how to draw money

a savings bank depositor may either draw money himself or through
some properly authorized person.

this is the method:

the deposit book is presented to the paying teller. the owner
states the sum he wants to draw.

having assured himself that the bearer of the book is the right
person, the teller takes a receipt in a book kept for the purpose,
for the amount, enters the same on the right hand or debit side of
the book, and hands out the money.

there is a form of authorization for another to draw, printed on
the deposit book. this must be copied and its directions complied
with.

most banks will not allow depositors to draw out less than a fixed
sum, say $5.00.

this saves trouble, and prevents thoughtless depositors from going
to the bank every time they want a dollar.

before a depositor can draw a large sum from a savings bank he may
be compelled, under the law, to give from one week to six weeks'
notice of his intention.

this provision may not prevent a run on the bank, but it gives the
managers time to provide for it.

read the rules in the deposit book.

how savings banks earn

how can a bank that does not discount notes or deal in loans and
commercial paper earn money? how can it pay interest?

while they may be individually small, the aggregate of all the
deposits in a savings bank may, and often do, amount to many
millions.

this money is not allowed to lie idle.

under the skilled direction of the bank officers, the money,
instead of lying idle in the vaults, is invested in many ways, but
always in accordance with the laws of the state under which the
bank is chartered.

much of the money is invested in mortgages on real estate, never
on personal property.

national bank stocks, sound railroad bonds, and other forms of
reliable interest security are fields for the investment of
savings bank funds.

savings banks are subject to the periodic inspection of state
officers appointed for the purpose.

the failure of a savings bank through bad investments or the
dishonesty of officials is very rare.

avoid all banks that promise more than the regular rate of
interest.

private banks may be, and usually are, honestly conducted, but to
be safe, deposit only with a bank that is regularly chartered and
is subject to the inspection of the law.

the savings bank is the best for the wage earner.




chapter x

notes--drafts



the promissory note is a most useful kind of commercial paper, and
it is in general use in business.

if a man has not sufficient ready cash to pay for the real estate
he is about to purchase, he makes up the difference by a note,
which note is secured by a mortgage on the property.

remember the mortgage must always be regarded as security. the
note represents the debt.

often wholesalers take a note as part or even full payment for a
bill of goods to a retailer.

if the wholesaler needs money, he endorses these notes and putting
them in his bank draws against them, less the discount he has to
pay for the accommodation.

as has been shown, an account may be transferred and sold, but a
note is more convenient for that purpose.

an illustration

as with a check the maker of a note is known as a "drawer," the
person in whose favor it is drawn is the "payee."

notes may be written in pencil, but it is better and safer to
write with ink on good paper.

supposing you buy a team of horses, or it may be a bill of goods,
from john brown, for $350.

now you have only $100 in cash. what are you to do?

mr. brown, knowing you to be reliable, says: "that's all right,
friend jones. you pay me the $100 cash for which i will give you a
receipt, then i will take your note for six months, payable at my
bank."

you agree to this; pay out the money, make and deliver the note
and take the property in question, which is now yours as much as
it had been his before the transfer.

the following would be a legal form in which to make the note:

  $250.                             summit, n. j.
                                  october 10, 1910.
  six months after date i promise to pay to
  the order of john brown..............
  two hundred and fifty ...... dollars,....
  at the lincoln national bank of summit
  .......... value received.
                          george jones.
    no. 1. due april 14, 1911.

now, if before the expiration of this note, you want to make a
payment on it of, say, $75, you take the money to mr. brown, who
endorses on the back of the note, "received on the within note
$75, january 3rd.," if that be the date, and signs, "john brown."

it may be well to remember that while a running account may be
collected at any time, the law cannot prevent the maker of a
promissory note from selling all his belongings and leaving the
country before the note is due.

days of grace

notes may be "time" notes, that is where there is a specified time
for payment, or "demand" notes. the latter are collectable on
presentation.

with the time notes "three days grace" are allowed after the
expiration of the date for payment. no such favor is allowed in
the case of demand notes.

these grace days do not seem businesslike. why not add them to the
date in the note? well, it is a custom, quite as old as the
greater part of our laws, and so it must be observed.

under the law a note is payable at the home or business place of
the drawer, unless otherwise specified.

indorsing notes

a note secured by a mortgage has its payment guaranteed.

the usual way of securing the payment of a note given in business
is to have it endorsed with a good name across the back, as in
endorsing a check.

by writing your name across the back of another man's note you
announce to all the holders of that note that you know the maker
and that if he does not pay it you will.

in most states the indorser of a note cannot be held responsible
for payment, unless the holder notifies him, within twenty-four
hours after the note comes due, that the maker cannot or will not
pay.

if an indorsed note changes hands, each indorser is responsible to
all endorsers who follow him and also to the last holder of the
note.

if an indorser, that is, one into whose hands the note has come
after the first endorsement, should not wish to guarantee payment,
he writes before his name, "without recourse to me."

this is known as a "qualified endorsement."

a negotiable note

most notes are negotiable; that is because they may be sold, like
any other personal property, or the ownership may be transferred
from one person to another.

no note is negotiable that does not bear on its face, the words,
"pay to bearer," or "pay to the order of," followed by the payee's
name.

joint notes

when two persons sign a note they become jointly and individually
responsible for its payment.

such persons are known as "joint makers."

if one signs his name on the back of a note before it has been
handed to the payee, he makes himself not only an endorser, but a
joint maker.

if the maker of such a note refuses to pay on the expiration of
time stated, he is liable for the amount without any notification.

discounting notes

if a business man borrows from a bank on his note, he must pay for
the privilege.

interest is a sum paid for the use of money.

interest is reckoned as a certain percentage yearly on the
principal.

interest on interest is called "compound interest" and is unused
in ordinary business transactions.

instead of collecting interest when the amount borrowed on a note
is due, or deducting it from the principal in advance, it
discounts the note at the rate agreed on and pays the rest.

this is called bank discount and its rate is variable, depending
on the abundance or scarcity of money.

money is a marketable article, and the price, like that of wheat
or cotton, is governed by supply and demand.

interest on notes

a note may be made payable "with interest," or not, as the parties
concerned may agree.

if nothing is said about interest in the note, no interest can be
collected.

again a note may go into details and specify that "the interest
shall be ten per cent, payable semi-annually," provided always
that the rate shall not be higher than the legal interest of the
state.

excessive interest is known as "usury." it invalidates all the
interest, and in some places the principal is forfeited.

when the holder of an interest note receives interest payment he
must record the date and sum on the back of the note.

protests

if a note comes due on sunday or on a legal holiday, payment must
be made on the following day.

holidays are appointed by the separate states.

the united states recognizes no day as a holiday, except sunday,
and that is acknowledged through custom.

it is customary for banks to notify makers of notes held by them a
few days before time set for payment; but this is not required by
law.

if a note lies unpaid in bank the day set for payment, as soon as
the office closes for regular business the note is protested.

the protest is made before a notary public; he is usually an
employee of the bank.

in the protest formal objection is made against the breaking of
the promise, and demanding that the matter be set right by the
maker, or on his failure, by the indorser.

the indorser, who has to pay, has a claim for the amount on the
maker of the note, as he would have for money loaned or goods
sold, and he can sue to collect.

a note that is not paid within a fixed time is said to be
"outlawed."

remember the indorser of a note must be notified within twenty-
four hours of the failure of the drawer to make good.

notices

the object in protesting a note is to fix the liability on the
endorser.

if there be more than one endorser notice of protest must be sent
to all at the same time.

it is better, where possible, to serve the notices on the
indorsers in person.

the payee must also be notified.

accommodations

there is a form of note sometimes used in business which is given
without any consideration on the part of the maker. this is known
as an "accommodation note."

the maker of such a note does not expect to pay it, nor does the
man in whose favor it is drawn expect to do so.

an accommodation note is an instrument by the sale of which, or
through a bank, money may be raised for immediate use.

the maker in this case is a friend who loans his name.

as there was no value received such a note could not be collected
by the payee.

but if it passes into the hands of a third party, who endorses it,
then the maker of the note can be compelled to pay.

a lost note

a note may be lost or stolen.

the losing of a note does not release the maker from payment of
the full amount on the date and at the place named.

the loser should at once notify the maker of his loss.

a man who buys, before its maturity, a lost or stolen note, may
collect the full amount from the maker, provided the note is
payable to "bearer" and no notice of the loss has been published.

when the maker of a lost note pays the amount to the original
owner, he should receive from him what is known as a "bond of
indemnity."

this bond is to secure him against paying a second time.

notes about notes

there are some things worth remembering about promissory notes.

1. never give one if you can pay cash.
2. a note made on sunday is worthless in some states.
3. a note given under compulsion is worthless.
4. notes made by a drunken person, or obtained by any form of
fraud cannot be collected under law.
5. notes bear interest only when so stated in body of note.
6. the holder of a note has a legal claim against every indorser.
7. each indorser is responsible to every indorser who follows him.
8. notes are valid without reference to the kind of paper, or
whether they are written with pen or pencil.
9. losing a note does not release the maker from payment.
10. if no time is set in a note for payment, it becomes due as
soon as it is made.
11. where a note is made in one state and is payable in another,
it is governed by the laws of the state in which it is to be paid.
12. notes payable on demand draw no interest until after they have
been presented for payment.
13. if a note reads "with interest" and no rate is specified then
it draws the legal interest in the state in which it was made.
14. demand notes are not entitled to days of grace.
15. if no place of payment is named in a note, it should be
presented to the maker personally in business hours.
16. the misspelling of a word or words in no way invalidates a
note.
17. if a person who cannot write makes a note his mark should be
properly witnessed.
18. the makers of a joint note must be sued jointly.
19. if the words and the figures in a note disagree, the words
take precedence.
20. a note signed by a firm may be collected from either of the
partners.
21. when a payment is made on a note secured by a mortgage, the
amount is endorsed on the note, never on the mortgage.
22. a note given by a minor is void, unless given for actual
necessities, like food and clothing.
23. if a note made by a minor is acknowledged when he comes of age
it is binding and collectible.




chapter xi

a draft



a draft is a written order from the first party to the second
party to pay to the third party a certain sum of money at a
certain time.

the first party is called the "drawer."

the second party is the "drawee."

the third party is the "payee."

there are two kinds of draft.

the first is usually where the cashier of one bank, through his
own check, draws on another bank for the cash difference in their
accounts with each other.

the second form of draft is the most usual and is the one we shall
here consider.

the cashier's draft is always for cash and the demand is always
honored. the ordinary business draft may be for cash or for goods.

the business draft is usually honored, but there are circumstances
under which it may be ignored.

to make a draft

but let us suppose that the draft is all right and that a
merchant, let us call him henry thomas, and suppose him a resident
of philadelphia, has a bill against james taylor, of cleveland,
and he wants to collect it, without recourse to law. how will he
go about it?

the bill is for $100.

mr. thomas writes this draft:

     philadelphia, pa., sept. 5, 1910.
   at sight pay to the order of
   johnson national bank of philadelphia
   one hundred................... dollars.
               with exchange
             and charge same to
                          henry thomas.
   to james taylor,
       cleveland, ohio.

having drawn his draft, mr. thomas takes it to the johnson
national bank for collection. the collection is actually made by
some bank in cleveland to which the johnson has endorsed it over.

if mr. thomas wished he might have sent his draft direct to the
cleveland bank, but he no doubt thought it better to transact such
matters through his own bank.

or if mr. thomas lived where he was not in touch with a bank, he
might have drawn through any person whom he knew in cleveland.

on receiving the draft for collection, the cleveland bank would at
once give it to a clerk who would without delay present it to mr.
taylor.

mr. taylor, having written his acceptance of the draft, is given
three days grace in which to make payment.

in states where days of grace are not allowed, he would have to
pay at once.

mr. taylor writes the word "accepted," with the date and his name
across the face of the draft, and if he does not pay cash, he
states in the writing where payment will be made.

of course, mr. taylor cannot be compelled to accept a draft. there
may be good and honest reasons for his not doing so, but having
accepted it, in business honor he is bound to pay it.

the term "sight draft" explains itself, but the order to pay a
draft may indicate, and often does, the number of days allowed for
payment, after presentation.

for collection

what should be done by the man to whom a bill or a note is due,
when the debtor lives in a place where there is no bank?

in that case he must learn in some way the name of a promising
person to make the collection for him.

in this case he makes out the draft as before, and adds the words
"for collection." this acts as a bar to any transfer of the paper.

most banks refuse to handle a draft marked "for collection."

dishonor

drafts are not necessarily duns.

some country merchants prefer to pay their bills to wholesalers in
that way, so that collecting drafts is no small part of the
business of the ordinary bank.

while men are not compelled to meet drafts when presented, if the
amount is due and he defaults or refuses to pay he injures his own
credit.

in refusing a just draft he is said to "dishonor" it.

so sure are wholesalers that their drafts will be met by their
distant debtors that they do not hesitate to draw against them
when deposited for collection, regarding them as cash to their
credit in bank.

protests

when a draft is not accepted or paid when due, if it be a time
draft, it is protested in the same way as a note.

the protest of a draft serves as a notice to the drawer of its
non-acceptance.

like notes and checks, drafts may be transferred by a similar
endorsement.

buying drafts

if i wanted to pay a bill for $150 to albert holt, living at
wallace, kansas, and did not wish to trouble him with a check, how
would i go about it?

1. i might express the cash, which would be expensive.
2. i might send it in postal order, not always certain.
3. i might send it by a trusted hand, but might have long to wait
before i found a friend going out to wallace.

i am living in new york city, and am familiar enough with banking
to know that new york is a great financial center and is in
constant communication with nearly all the outside banks.

the outside banks keep money in deposit here, and the new york
banks, particularly in the spring and autumn, keep deposits with
their correspondents.

with my $150 and a small extra sum to pay my bank for drawing the
draft, i go thither and buy a draft for the sum i owe mr. holt.

i mail this draft to my creditor and he can cash it without loss
in his home bank. here is the form:

                              no. 101.
    madison national bank of new york.
  pay to the order of albert holt,
  one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.)...
  ..........               l. n. jones,
                                 cashier.
  to prairie national bank,
    wallace, kansas.

a good plan

when you buy a draft which you mean to send off in payment of a
debt, a good plan is to have it made payable to yourself.

let us suppose it is the case of albert holt. you transfer the
draft to him by writing across the back, "pay to the order of
albert holt," and add your signature.

now as all drafts are returned, as payment vouchers, to the banks
from which they were issued, and as mr. holt must have signed the
draft to get his money, it follows that there is a record of his
having received it, and this has all the force of a receipt.

do not endorse a draft with just your name, for in that case,
anyone into whose hands it falls may collect. first write "pay to
the order of" the person for whom it is intended.

good as cash

a draft made payable to yourself is as good as cash, and far safer
to carry.

if you are identified at any bank between the atlantic and
pacific, you can have your draft cashed.

all banks furnish blank drafts.

never endorse a draft made payable to yourself, and this applies
to a check, until you are about to use it.

it is a good plan never to sign your name until it is actually
necessary.

some people have the foolish habit of signing their names on stray
bits of paper.

do not get into this habit, even if there is no space to fill out
a note or order above the signature.




chapter xii

just money



as has been before stated, money in its broadest meaning is a
medium of exchange.

anything that can pay a debt or purchase property, in any part of
a country, is the money of that country.

every civilized country has its own minted or printed money.

the usual mediums of circulation are gold, silver, nickel and
copper, the latter alloyed more or less in the united states with
nickel.

government and bank bills, while having all the purchasing power
of gold, are simply promises to pay in gold, or other coin of
"redemption", the amounts they represent.

the money of one country cannot legally be made to pay a debt in
another country, unless both parties to the payment agree to it.

when gold is exchanged to settle the balances of trade between two
countries, it is not reckoned, if coined, at its face value, but
at its bullion value.

the word "pecunia" meant in ancient greece and rome a flock or
herd.

in those days live stock were used as a medium of exchange, or
money.

we keep the word and often use it as in "pecuniary" affairs, and
when we call a moneyless man, "impecunious."

united states money

the united states government reserves to itself the right under
the constitution, to coin and issue the money to be used by its
own people.

formerly we had two standards of value, gold and silver, or
bimetalism.

if gold and silver were produced in relatively equal quantities,
the world would go on trading with money of both kinds, but the
proportions are not the same.

among the aztecs and peruvians silver ranked with gold as two to
one, that is, two pounds of silver would purchase as much as one
pound of gold.

but when great silver mines were discovered and new methods were
discovered for extracting the metal, it became more and more
abundant, till it depreciated far below the former value it had in
its relation to gold.

most of the commercial nations decided to have but one standard of
value, and that gold, long before the united states fell into
line.

our money measure is known as the decimal, or metric. it would be
convenient, if we could follow the example of nearly all the other
commercial nations, and use the metric system for all our weights
and measures.

our metal money

in the united states treasury at washington, there are many
million dollars in silver coins and bullion.

the gold standard has not driven silver out of circulation, for it
is still found convenient to use it in settling immediately our
smaller business transactions.

when the silver dollar was first coined, and indeed up to the
present date, the intention was that it should contain about a
dollar's worth of silver, or 374 1/4 troy grains of the pure
metal. this amount of silver was supposed to represent permanently
24 3/4 grains of pure gold, and it did so represent its value at
one time, and would have continued to do so, had the relative
output of both metals been the same.

our chief mint is in philadelphia, where is coined all the copper,
nickel, silver, and gold money in use.

to imitate these metals, even where the full value is given,
constitutes the criminal offence called "counterfeiting."

in former times, some of our older readers will remember them, the
government meant to have the metal in each coin of about its
unstamped value in the market.

in those days the cent was as large as our present silver half
dollar, and the copper two-cent piece was a monster in the way of
coinage.

now our copper and nickel coins are small and can be carried
without testing strength of pockets. they are regarded as money
"tokens."

silver coins that are punched can be refused in the settlement of
a debt.

punched gold coins should always be refused, for they are never of
their face value.

silver coins may be used in the settlement of bills up to $5.00.

gold coins are, of course, legal tender up to any amount.

paper money

we usually class all paper money as "bills."

there are three classes of bills, all quite different in their
inception and meaning. these are--

1. national bank notes.
2. treasury notes or "greenbacks."
3. treasury certificates.

bank notes

a national bank note is the guaranteed promise of some national
bank to pay coin or its equivalent to any one presenting the note
at the bank and asking to have the exchange made.

this exchange is called "redeeming."

if you examine a bank bill you will notice that it is drawn much
like an ordinary business "demand" note, made payable to "bearer,"
and signed by the bank president and cashier.

for every dollar of its own sent out in the form of a bill by a
national bank, the government holds a dollar of the bank's
collateral to guarantee the redemption of the note if the bank
should fail.

national bank notes are received in all business transactions,
because they are secured by the government, yet there are cases in
which even the government will not receive them in payment of a
claim, nor pay them out itself.

1. all import duties must be paid in gold.
2. the government pays the interest on its own bonds in gold.

the bureau of engraving and printing--a department of the united
states treasury--makes and prints all the national bank notes.

on all these notes the names of the united states treasurer and
the united states register appear. the names look like signatures,
but they are facsimilies and are printed with the note.

the notes are printed on specially prepared paper, to imitate
which is regarded as a counterfeit.

soiled and worn out bank notes may be exchanged for fresh ones at
the treasury department.

"greenbacks"

greenbacks are treasury notes. the name comes from the color in
which they first appeared in the years of our civil war.

the treasury note is really an engraved promissory note of the
united states government made payable to the bearer, and bearing
the signatures of the treasurer and register of the treasury.

these notes are issued in denominations of from five to ten
thousand dollars.

formerly there were one and two-dollar treasury notes issued, and
we still find some of these "old-timers" in circulation.

there are so many treasury notes in circulation that the
government, vast though its bullion and coin reserves are, could
not redeem them if presented at once.

the treasury note is a legal tender for any amount of
indebtedness.

the government prints the following guarantee on every treasury
note:

"this note is, by law, to be considered as good as coin. any one
to whom you pay it must reckon it as equivalent to a dollar (or
face value in dollars) in value."

treasury certificates

the treasury certificate is, in form, very much like the treasury
note, and it bears the signatures of the same officers.

treasury certificates are of two kinds, gold and silver.

the gold certificates are printed in yellow.

the silver certificates are light black and white.

these certificates are issued against the great reserves of gold
and silver that are kept to redeem them.

the use of the gold certificate saves the loss of the gold that
comes through abrasion when handled.

a five-dollar silver certificate is much more convenient to carry
than five silver dollars.

these certificates, as may be seen, are issued for the convenience
of the public.

certificates of either character will be redeemed to any amount,
in the metals for which they call, if presented at the united
states treasury at washington, or at any of the sub-treasuries to
be found in our larger cities.

worn-out notes

only those familiar with the work can realize the great quantities
of bank bills, treasury notes, and certificates continually being
made and sent out from washington.

while a stream of clean, fresh paper of enormous value is going
out to be spread all over the country, another stream of soiled,
torn and altogether disreputable-looking paper is flowing back to
the treasury.

the filthy paper is quite as valuable as the clean, so it is
properly checked, recorded, and credited before new paper is sent
out in its place.

they are now trying to make old bills presentable by washing them
at the department. meanwhile, most of them are ground again into
pulp, made into new paper, and all the first processes gone
through with to make the paper into money.




chapter xiii

our postal business



up to a few years ago, it was the city, town and village dweller
who reaped the greatest benefit from the post office.

in dense communities carriers leave the mail at the place to which
it is addressed. where this is not done the walk for the mail is
not far.

now the purpose of our government, which is of the people and by
the people, is to treat all the people alike.

however, up to a few years ago the farmer, our most essential
producer, had not a fair deal.

fortunately things have changed and are still changing for the
better.

rural free delivery was an idea as just as it was grand, and as
welcome as it was necessary.

the good work began october 1, 1896.

the purpose of rural free delivery is to accommodate dwellers in
the country, whether farmers or not.

through this branch of the service mails are carried daily, on
fixed lines of travel, to people who otherwise would have to go
long distances to reach a post office.

the government requires that the states or counties shall keep in
good condition the roads traversed by the mail carriers.

gates must not obstruct, and it is required that every unfordable
stream shall be bridged.

it is further required, as a condition for establishing a line for
rural free delivery, that each route of twenty-four or more miles
in length shall have at least one hundred families resident on
either side.

classified mail matter

mail matter is divided into four classes. for each class a
different rate is charged.

first class:--all letters, and all other written matter, with a
few exceptions, pay two cents for each ounce, or fraction of an
ounce.

second class:--newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, one
cent for each four ounces or fraction of four ounces. publishers
of periodicals, sending direct from place of publication, get a
lower rate,--one cent a pound.

third class:--books, circulars, and other printed matter, one cent
for two ounces or fraction of two ounces.

fourth class:--merchandise and miscellaneous articles, weighing
not over four pounds, one cent for each ounce or fraction of an
ounce.

postal rules

1. on a tag, or the paper on which the address is written, the
sender of third class matter may write "from" and add his own name
and address.
2. on the blank leaf of a book, forwarded as third class matter,
the sender may write a dedication or inscription, but it must not
be in the form of a letter.
3. fourth class matter must be so wrapped that the postal
authorities can examine the contents without much trouble.
4. such articles as glass, nails, needles or other matter that
might work injury if it came loose, must be enclosed in two
separate wrappings, or a double case.
5. poisons, explosives, inflammable substances, and live animals
are excluded from the mails.
6. firearms may only be sent in detached parts.
7. all alcoholic liquors are regarded as explosive.

foreign rates

the rates to canada are the same for all classes of matter as in
the united states, except that seeds, scions, bulbs, cuttings, and
roots are one cent per ounce.

to cuba all the rates are the same as for domestic matter.

rates with mexico are the same as if mailed between our own
states. packages are limited to 4 pounds 6 ounces, except that
single books may weigh more. merchandise must be sent by parcel
post.

to all other countries, in what is known as the "postal union",
the rates for letters are five cents for each half ounce or
fraction thereof.

postal cards two cents each, double four cents.

registration fees or letters or other articles, four cents each.

ordinary letters for foreign countries, except canada, cuba and
mexico, must be forwarded, whether any postage is paid on them or
not.

all other mailable matter must be prepaid.

alaska, hawaii, guam, tetuila, the philippines and porto rico are
regarded as insular or territorial possessions of the united
states, and are entitled to the same postal rates.

stamps

postage stamps may be purchased at any united states post office,
or at any place authorized to sell them.

anyone may sell postage stamps as he would any other personal
asset.

if stamps are bought to be enclosed in a letter, they should never
be of a higher denomination than twos and ones, as they are easily
disposed of.

letters should always be stamped on the upper right-hand corner of
the envelope.

packages should be stamped in the same way and on the addressed
side.

the using of cancelled stamps is a felony.

foreign stamps have no value on letters or parcels mailed in the
united states.

a domestic, unstamped letter will not be forwarded.

if a stamped letter is found to require more postage, the amount
lacking is stamped on the letter, and must be paid by the
receiver.

stamped envelopes and stamped wrappers are sold by the post office
at the usual rates of postage, with the cost of the paper added.

if a stamped envelope or wrapper is spoiled, the stamp must not be
cut off and used by pasting on another envelope or wrapper, for it
will be treated as if no postage were paid.

such spoiled wrappers or envelopes will be exchanged, without
charge, by the postmaster, for stamps of the same value.

postal cards

never use a postal card to dun a debtor.

never send a confidential message on a postal card.

foreign postal cards, that is those bearing a foreign stamp,
cannot be used in the united states.

an international postal card can be bought.

postal cards and letters may be redirected and forwarded without
extra charge, where the address of the receiver has been changed.
packages require a renewal of payment in such cases.

registering letters

a letter or a parcel may be registered to further insure its safe
delivery.

when a letter or parcel is registered, it must have the sender's
name and address written across the left-hand end of the envelope
and on the reverse side.

in addition to the stamps required ordinarily, eight cents in
stamps or in a regularly prepared stamp, is the registration fee.

the clerk, receiving a registered parcel, gives the sender a
receipt for the same. after the letter has reached its
destination, the sender gets a second receipt, through the post
office, signed with the receiver's name.

the receiver of a registered parcel signs two receipts, one for
the post office and the other for the sender.

special delivery

the purpose of what is known, in connection with the post office,
as the "special delivery system", is to insure the delivery of any
letter or package to the person, to whom it is addressed, as soon
as it reaches his post office.

in addition to the regular post charge, a fee of 10 cents is added
for special delivery. this is in the form of a special stamp,
though when this cannot be had, the same amount in ordinary stamps
may be attached.

in the case noted, the sender should write in line with the
stamps, "special delivery."

special delivery messages are delivered, not by ordinary carriers,
but by special delivery messengers.

the special delivery letter is used when immediate knowledge is
necessary. it saves a long telegram.

money orders

money, in limited sums, may be sent through the post office. one
advantage of sending money in this way is that it practically
insures the sender against loss.

all post offices are not money order offices.

a post office money order may only be sent to those places where
there are such offices.

at all post offices, authorized to send money orders, proper
blanks can be had on which the sender can write his order.

any sum may be sent by postal order, from one cent to one hundred
dollars.

the fee is from three to thirty cents.

read the blank carefully; it is simple, but be sure you understand
it before filling out the order.

if in doubt, ask the clerk.

having filled out the order, hand it to the clerk with the sum
required, and the additional fee.

the clerk then prepares and hands out an order for the amount, on
the postmaster of the town to which you are sending your letter,
and this you enclose to your correspondent.

cashing post office orders

the money order never contains the name of the sender; this the
postmaster of the office from which it is sent supplies in a
separate communication to the postmaster who is to pay.

no money passes from one office to the other.

a post office order is like a draft drawn by one postmaster on
another. the one credits the sum, the other debits it.

the holder of an order will not get his money unless he is known
to the paying postmaster or is identified.

before paying an order the postmaster requires the holder to
receipt it.

a post office money order, like a check or draft, may be
transferred to another for collection.

banks receive transferred money orders as if they were cash
deposits.

the party to whom orders are transferred must go through the same
forms at the office, where payment is made, as if he was the
original payee.

advice

it is not necessary to register letters containing checks. never
write "personal" on a business letter.

always enclose a stamp for reply when writing to a stranger.

see that the addresses on your letters are distinctly legible.




chapter xiv

telegrams--the telephone



to send a telegram, you or your messenger must take what you have
written to the nearest telegraph office.

you may write a telegram on any kind of paper, provided always
that the writing is plain.

all telegraph offices are provided with regular blank forms, which
may be had without cost, and it is better to use these when they
are available.

the blank is properly ruled, with lines for the date, for the
address of the one to whom it is to be sent, and for the message.

charges

the telegraph company charges a fixed sum for a message of, say,
ten words. these words do not include the name and address of the
sender.

the amount of the charge is always dependent on the distance
between the office from which the message is sent and the one at
which it is received.

every word over ten, in the message, pays an extra fee, dependent
again on the distance.

getting just what you mean into ten words may seem difficult when
you have a lot to say, but it is surprising how you can boil the
message down when each additional word costs five or more cents.

it may pay to practice this.

if it is actually necessary to make your meaning clear by the
addition of more words, do not hesitate at the cost.

if you are known at the telegraph office, you can send a message
to be collected from the receiver.

never permit the receiver to pay for a message that is exclusively
on your own business.

always make and keep a copy of every important telegram you send
away. do not neglect this.

if you have neglected to keep a copy of a telegram, or having made
one have lost it, you may get a copy from the telegraph office,
provided the application be made within six months of the sending
of the message.

telegrams are delivered by the company's messengers.

you must give receipt to the messenger on the delivery of a
telegram.

where the receiver lives a long distance from the telegraph
office, it is customary to pay the messenger an additional fee,
depending on the distance.

the charges for telegrams to be sent at night and delivered in the
morning, are much lower than for day messages.

for an additional charge, less than the original, messages may be
repeated back to insure their accuracy.

read over to the official, or still better, have him read your
message over in your presence, that you may be sure he understands
it as written.

you cannot hold others responsible for your own mistakes.

telegraphing money

you can telegraph money with as much safety as you can send it
through a bank.

in handling money in this way, the telegraph company does not act
as a banker but as a carrier.

telegraph money orders are a great convenience, when one wants to
send cash to a distant point in a hurry.

country telegraph offices do not, as a rule, transmit money; that
function is left to the offices in the larger centers.

the method

one wishing to "wire money" will find at the telegraph office
suitable blanks; they are furnished gratis.

on lines provided for the purpose and properly indicated, as in a
postal order form, write the name and address of the person to
receive the money, with the amount.

this paper, properly signed, is handed to the clerk with the money
to be sent and the fee for transmission.

the fee is double that charged for an ordinary message of the same
length.

if, for any reason, the person to whom the money is sent cannot be
found within forty-eight hours, the money is returned to the
sender, but the fees are retained, as the company is not to blame
for failure.

the receiver of a money order, if unknown, must identify himself
as he would at a bank, and he must receipt for the money.

if the person to receive the money is an entire stranger in the
place to which the money is sent, the sender knows it, and he
provides for the situation by signing, on the reverse of the
application, an order to the distant operator to pay the money to
the person named within, without further identification.

when a telegraph operator receives a money order, he at once seeks
out the person to whom it is sent, and pays the money in
accordance with his instructions as to identification.

the telephone

the telephone, local and long distance, is fast superceding the
telegraph as a medium for speedy business communications.

its use is not confined to large cities as at first.

nearly every village is now in communication with the outer world
through the telephone.

the world has just awakened to the needs of its food producer, the
farmer.

in norway, which is not a rich country, the telephone has been
introduced on the farms. the rates are low and the benefits are
inestimable.

on our large farms, in the west, telephones have been in use for
some time as an essential part of the machinery.

now, there is a move on foot to make them available for every
farmer in the more settled regions.

while business can be conducted over the telephone, as if the
speakers stood face to face, yet such transactions not being
recorded, will not stand in law, if one of the parties should
dispute the other's word.




chapter xv

business by express



there are two kinds of expresses, viz.: local and general. the
names describe the provinces of each, though a general express may
do a local business.

all express companies are common carriers.

the carrying business done by our express companies is enormous.
they have their own special cars attached to passenger and fast
freight trains, and their goods are given special departments in
water transportation.

if living between two towns, it is always better to have your
letters and express business done through one office.

instructions

when ordering material by express, make sure that you give the
address, to which you wish it sent, in such a way that a mistake
on the part of the forwarder will be out of the question.

if you send away goods by express, make sure that they are
securely packed, and be equally sure that the address is clearly
written and in a large hand. it would be better if the address
could be painted on with a brush.

if you should send perishable stuff, like meat, flowers, glass, or
fruit, be sure to label the package "perishable" or "handle with
care, glass."

on long distance transportation prepayment is required; on short
distances it is optional.

it is always better to get from the express agent a receipt for
the matter taken in charge.

take care to put your own address on the lower left-hand corner of
the package to be sent.

if the person to whom the parcel is sent cannot be found, the
address will enable the express company to notify the sender at
once of the fact.

when sending any goods by express, it is always prudent to notify
the person for whom they are intended of the fact by mail, and
also to state the company by which the matter was sent and the
date of shipment.

the company's duty

the express company must always require, on delivering goods, a
receipt from the receiver.

if the goods should be received by a second person, on behalf of
the consignee, he must sign the consignee's name, and under that
his own.

if a package appears to be damaged in transmission, the express
company must permit the receiver to examine it before signing. he
may refuse to sign or to accept in any way, if the goods are
injured, or not as he ordered.

express companies are responsible for all damages sustained by
goods while in their charge.

collections by express

all the large express companies have the machinery for collecting
accounts and notes whenever they have branch offices.

such companies are reliable collectors. their services are prompt
and their charges reasonable.

where an express company fails to collect, notice is promptly
given with the reasons for failure.

when you wish an express company to collect, it will be necessary
for you to make out a statement of the account. this is placed in
a special envelope, provided by the company. it is properly
indorsed and handed to the company's representative.

the company charges a small fee for collection, whether it
succeeds or not. in any case the fee is not much above a fourth of
one per cent, unless there should be unusual trouble.

c. o. d. by express

as you know, c.o.d. means "cash on delivery".

cash on delivery orders constitute no small part of every express
company's business.

when goods are forwarded in this way, the sender furnishes with
the goods an itemized bill duly receipted. the express company's
charges should be included in the bill.

the express agent is sure to collect the bill before he lets the
goods leave his keeping.

money by express

should you desire to send money by express, it will be well to go
to the company's office before you pack it up.

express companies have special receptacles or envelopes in which
to store coin or bills. there is no charge for these.

the sender must himself seal the packages containing the money,
and write on them the address of the consignee, also the amount
enclosed.

having received the packages, the express agent ties them up,
affixes his official seal, which is so arranged that the package
cannot be opened or tampered with, without breaking. this done, he
gives the sender a receipt. this should be cared for as a vital
part of the record.

the charges for sending money by express may or may not be paid in
advance. they vary with the amount to be carried and the distance.

packages of money are receipted for in the usual way. they are
delivered only to the legal consignee, unless a second person
should appear with an order, amounting to a power of attorney, and
which the company cannot reject.

money orders

the foregoing by no means limits the express company's usefulness
or field of opportunities.

express companies issue money orders much as does the post office
department.

as with the post office, the fees for orders vary, but no order is
issued for more than fifty dollars.

if you want to send such an order, the express company will
furnish the proper blank for you to fill out.

on this form must be written out very plainly the name and address
of the person to whom the order is to be sent, with the amount, in
words and in figures.

on receiving the money the express agent gives to his customer two
papers; one is the company's receipt for the money, the other is
the order itself.

the order instructs the agent at the point to which it is to be
sent to pay the sum named to the person named.

to complete the order the sender should sign his name in a place
indicated for the purpose on the back of the paper.

this done, the order can be sent to the person for whom it is
intended, in an ordinary envelope.

the receiver of an express money order can have it cashed at the
express office in his town, or sign it and place it in his own
bank as if it were cash.




chapter xvi

about railroads



not everything about railroads, that would be a tremendous
undertaking, but just enough to show what everyone should know
about them as carriers of goods.

the express companies have practically a monopoly of the
transportation of the smaller packages of goods requiring quick
transit and immediate delivery, but the longer, heavier, and
slower freight are in the hands of the railroads, and where it can
be done, and time is not a first factor, the steamboat takes the
place of the train.

bills of lading

as most of the goods in changing hands are carried by steamboat or
railroad, the method of shipment should be understood by everyone
who may be called on to use one or the other means of
transportation.

the person shipping goods in this way is the "consignor."

the person to whom the goods are shipped is the "consignee".

the goods shipped are described in a paper called a "bill of
lading."

a bill of lading is a written contract, or statement of the goods
shipped, their condition, and the time of shipment.

bills of lading and receipt blanks are furnished at the offices of
the transportation companies.

two copies of the bill of lading should be made out. one of these
is signed by the consignor and the other by the transportation
agent.

the copy signed by the consignor is kept by the agent, and the
copy signed by the agent is retained by the consignor, as a
voucher for the goods shipped.

this receipt should be mailed to the consignee.

when the consignee gets this bill of lading, it is a voucher to
the freight agent, where the goods are to be delivered, as to the
ownership.

it is usual for the agent at the point of shipment to send a copy
of the bill of lading to the agent where the goods are received.
in this way he can compare the consignment with the consignee's
bill.

expense bills

it is not usual to pay freight bills at the point of shipment,
that being left till the goods reach their destination.

the agent at the place of delivery makes out an "expense bill,"
which is an itemized statement of the freight charges, and must be
paid by the consignee before delivery.

this done, the consignee must sign a receipt for the goods
delivered, and the affair is closed.

a bill and a draft

before wholesale houses or manufacturers ship goods, they are
either paid for or they have a business understanding with the
consignee as to when and how the payment is to be made.

there are occasions, however, when no such arrangement has been
made, and a man not well known to the merchant orders goods
shipped by freight.

in a case like this, the merchant may ascertain through a
commercial agency--the agencies make it their business to keep
posted in such matters--the standing of the man giving the order.

trade has its risks and the merchant, even where the information
is not quite assuring, may decide to fill the order and ship it.

as with express companies, goods may be sent as freight, c. o. d.

this is done by means of a bill of lading, to which is attached a
draft. the shipper bills the goods to himself at the point to
which they were ordered.

to the bill of lading he attaches a draft for the sum involved,
but this, instead of being forwarded to the consignee by mail, is
sent to him through a bank for collection.

now before the consignee can get the bill of lading, which
authorizes him to receive the goods, he must pay the draft.

the bill, which is in the shipper's name, is then endorsed over to
the payer of the draft.

country merchants and sometimes farmers send produce by freight to
be sold on commission in the city.

an invoice

        delhi, n. y., sept. 9, 1910.
   invoice of merchandise shipped by
                       harry t. jackson
 and consigned to brown, smith & co.,
                       newburg, n. y.
   to be sold on commission.
    120 bbls. potatoes
     70 " green apples
     40 crates tomatoes.

mark plainly all goods shipped.




chapter xvii

taxes



generally speaking, tax bills are paid with reluctance.

this is no doubt due to the fact that with every other form of
payment one has something tangible to show for the expenditure.

if every good citizen could be brought to see that his private
interests are closely linked with public affairs, he would take
more interest in the local politics of his town and county, and so
have a voice in the expenditure of taxes by selecting the best men
to do the work for him.

taxes are forced contributions levied on citizens to provide money
for public expenses, such as law and order, schools, charities and
public institutions.

all tax laws are made by the men who pay the taxes.

you say "no" to this.

"the tax laws are made by the legislators up at the state
capital."

very true; but who nominates and elects the legislators? did you
not put them into office?

"no, the bosses did that," you reply.

true again, but good men are in the majority and if they did their
duty to their country and themselves, there would be no bosses and
taxes would be honestly spent.

kinds of taxes

tax laws are enacted by congress, and by the legislatures of our
many states. taxes cannot be collected without this authority.

state taxes are collected for the state use only.

united states taxes are expended for the benefit of all the people
of all the states.

taxes may be further divided into direct and indirect.

direct taxes are, at present, only employed by the states. they
are levied on realty and personal property, and are paid by the
particular person named in the tax bill presented by the
authorized collector.

the amount of these taxes vary each year, depending on the public
requirements.

they are based on assessments made by officers appointed for the
purpose and generally known as assessors.

customs duty

though there is no demand made on each individual to pay the
indirect taxes required by the government, yet indirectly every
person who spends little or much money is paying them.

the government's chief means of raising the great sums of money
needed yearly to carry on its machinery is by customs duties and
internal revenue collections.

the customs revenue is obtained from a tax levied on certain
articles imported from foreign countries.

this customs tax is called a tariff.

the question as to the goods that shall be subject to a tariff and
the amount to be levied on the same, is one that has long
perplexed statesmen and been a leading party issue.

the merchant, to whom the goods are assigned from a foreign port,
must pay the duty levied on them by a government appraiser before
he can take them away.

private parties, landing from abroad at any of our ports of entry,
are required, before getting their baggage, to write out a
declaration of the things contained in their trunks. but this
declaration does not prevent the customs inspectors from making a
careful personal examination. all things found dutiable, whether
declared or not, are set apart and held until the assessment or
duty is paid.

the evasion of a customs duty is called "smuggling" and is
punished by the confiscation of the goods, and penalties in the
way of fine and imprisonment.

there are people who would consider it a sin to cheat their
butcher, but see no wrong in cheating the government.

to the merchant who pays tariff duties the amount involved is a
direct tax.

when the merchant sells his goods to the retailer or consumer, he
adds the tariff to his freight, insurance, interest, etc., as
direct purchase cost. this is strict business, but the consumer
pays all the bills with the profit added.

internal revenue

the second great source of government revenue is derived from the
internal revenue tax, or excise duties.

manufacturers of alcohol, whether as wine, whiskey, or beer, and
the producers of tobacco, in its manufactured forms, have to pay
an excise tax in proportion to the amount and character of their
products.

as with the customs tax, the excise tax is added by the
manufacturer to the cost of production, so that at last it is the
consumer who pays it.

stamps

while the manufacturers of alcohol pay the excise tax in bulk,
that is on the number of gallons produced, the manufacturers of
cigars and tobacco have to attach to each separate package a
distinct internal revenue stamp.

these stamps are purchased from the internal revenue collectors,
appointed by the government to certain districts. the stamps show
at a glance that the proper tax has been paid, just as the postage
stamp affixed to a letter proves that the price for carrying it
and delivering it has been paid.

as it is a penal offence to use a postage stamp a second time, so
it is a punishable offence to attempt the use of a cancelled or
torn internal revenue stamp.

if demanded, the government will give a receipt for the sum
received from any one for considerable sales of postal or revenue
stamps.

state taxes

state taxes, as has been stated, are levied on real and personal
property. some states have in addition a poll tax. this is levied
on the individual without any regard to his property, and a
receipt for it may be a requirement before a citizen is permitted
to vote.

of course the real estate and personal property taxes are not the
same in all the states, for each state must raise every year the
sum necessary to meet its own special requirements.

the intention of all tax laws is to have every citizen's
contribution bear the same proportion to the whole amount to be
raised that his possessions bear to the aggregate property of all
the owners in the commonwealth.

exempt from taxes

all our state laws exempt from taxation certain kinds of property.

the state cannot tax the property held by itself for the common
use.

the buildings and related properties of religious bodies and
societies are not taxable.

such educational institutions as colleges, seminaries, and private
charities are not taxed.

cemeteries and other places where the dead are disposed of are not
taxed.

county buildings, city parks, public schools, penal institutions,
fair grounds for public use and similar property is never taxed.

insufficient taxes

there have been times in the life of the government, and in the
building up of the states, when the funds necessary for
maintenance from taxes, heavy though these have been at times,
have not been sufficient to meet the essential expenditures.

this was particularly the case with our government during the
trying days of our civil war.

states entering on great public works, for the benefit of the
commonwealth, frequently cannot raise the necessary money by the
usual forms of taxation.

in these cases loans have to be made, that is the government and
the state go out and borrow from those who have it to spare, the
necessary money.

the government, the state, and it may be the city or county, gives
to the party providing the money what is known as bond or bonds,
each of a fixed amount and bearing a fixed rate of interest,
payable as a rule semi-annually.

personal property

there is no form of property so easy to assess for the purpose of
taxation as real estate, that is the land and the buildings, for
the last selling value of this property is a matter of public
record, and then the assessors, who should be men of honesty and
good judgment, are generally posted as to the value of the
property under consideration.

when, however, it comes to the taxation of personal property,
which means any kind of property that can be detached and carried
about, it is a different matter.

just as many people, otherwise regarded as honest, do not think it
a great wrong to get the better of the custom house, so many
reputable people are inclined to revolt against the tax on
personal property and to conceal their actual possessions from the
assessor, nor is this peculiarity confined to the poor.

any man may be legally compelled to swear to the accuracy of his
statement, and if it is found that he has knowingly sworn to a
false statement, he may be brought to task for perjury.

what is known as "personal property" varies in many of the states.

personal property generally includes, merchandise in possession;
all fixtures, all furniture in home, offices, and factories; all
live stock, all money on hand and in banks; other men's notes, not
transferred; all stocks and bonds and other forms of security.

town taxes

townships or counties, if properly authorized by charter or the
votes of the people, may levy special taxes for special purposes
within the limits of their own jurisdictions, or they may in the
same way sell bonds to carry out some work that has been decided
on for the common weal.

two or more towns, or counties, may join in the same way to carry
out a project of benefit to both, provided that the burden of the
undertaking be equitably assessed.

payments

all tax bills are due and collectable on presentation, but this is
never enforced.

a time is, however, fixed beyond which payment cannot be deferred.

a sufficient amount of any property may be sold at auction to
satisfy a tax bill.

of old, and still in some places, the road taxes were paid in
cash, but more frequently by work on the roads, either by the
individual man, or in connection with his team, each day's work of
one or both being fixed at a regular rate.

taxing corporations

the state does not tax the individual members of a corporation for
property held in common. the same result is secured better by
taxing the corporation as a body. this applies to banks,
railroads, and incorporated manufacturing establishments.

savings banks are taxed lightly. every depositor is liable for a
personal property tax proportioned to the amount of his credit.

to make collection easy the savings bank always pays the amount of
this tax in bulk, and then charges it to the expense account of
the establishment, so that indirectly the depositors pay after
all, as their dividends are reduced by just the amount of the tax.

taxes in general

when a man owns property in different towns, counties, or states,
he is regarded as so many individuals, and must pay each as the
local demands require. no matter where a man's personal property
is placed, the rule is to tax him for the whole at the place of
his usual residence.

the landlord and the merchant each pays a direct tax to the
collector, but it would be a business error to think that in so
doing either or both is carrying more than his share of the total
taxation.

the landlord keeps in mind the added expense when he comes to
adjust leases with his tenants. the merchant, who pays taxes on
his stock and so adds to his expense account, should not be blamed
if he keeps this in mind when he fixes the selling prices of his
goods.

the returns

taxes duly paid, honestly collected, and properly expended should
never be regarded as a burden.

from no equal expenditure of money do the people get so much good.

the public schools, the public highways, the protection of life
and property, public hospitals, public libraries, residences for
the old, the blind, the orphaned and the insane, as well as secure
places for the lawless, are built and maintained by the taxpayer.

as a rule all these things are done honestly and well,
notwithstanding the outcry to the contrary.

if there be dishonesty in places, it is the fault quite as much of
the voter who selected him as of the official culprit himself.

we must take all the responsibility of our agents, whether they be
public or private.

every good citizen should feel that his public duty is an
important private business.




chapter xviii

contracts, leases, and guarantees



the law books define a contract to be "an agreement between two or
more persons to do or not to do a certain stated thing or things,
for a consideration."

the consideration is a vital part of every contract.

there can be no binding contract without a consideration.

the other requisites of a contract are--

1. it must be possible of accomplishment.
2. it must be in accordance with law.
3. its performance must not injure the public.
4. the parties to a contract must be competent to do the things to
which they pledge themselves.
5. a drunken or an insane man cannot make a contract.
6. all parties to a contract must be agreed.

the consideration

no contract can be held as binding where the consideration is not
named.

a promise, verbal or in writing, to do something for a certain
party, cannot be enforced.

a promise to do the same thing for a stipulation named is a
contract and may be enforced.

a gift is not a form of contract. once made it cannot be legally
taken back.

written and verbal contracts

there are certain forms of contract which cannot be legally
enforced, unless they are in writing.

1. all contracts for the sale of real estate.
2. contracts that are not to be performed for a year or more.
3. all contracts, to answer for the debt and obligations of
another, must be in writing.

if the contracting parties put but a part of their agreement in
writing the law will recognize only the written part. the whole
must be in writing, or the agreement will not hold.

verbal contracts are not safe.

although the law does not require even contract to be in writing,
yet, as it never declares that a contract must be verbal, it is
the part of prudence, wherever possible, to put every contract in
writing.

owing to defects of memory even honest men may, and frequently do,
disagree as to the terms of a verbal contract.

because the party with whom the contract is made is a close
friend, one is apt to depend on a verbal agreement, but the closer
the friend or relative, the more reason there is for an exact
written contract, if we would keep the friend.

forms of contract

the law is never specific as to the form of contract that may be
used.

it is not necessary to draw up the contract with the formal
accuracy of a real estate deed.

any one with good sense and a fair common school education can
draw up a contract that will hold.

know what is required, then state the facts simply.

contracts need not be sworn to or even witnessed.

kinds of contract

every note, mortgage and other form of obligation is a specific
contract.

a lease is a form of contract between two people, known as
landlord and tenant, for the use of real estate for a period and
at a rental specified in the document.

a verbal lease may be made for a short period, but if for a year
or more, it must be in writing.

a lease should state when, where and to whom the rent is to be
paid.

each party to a lease, or other form contract should have a copy.

if the premises rented should become unusable by fire or any
action of the elements the tenant is still liable for rent, unless
there is a special clause in the lease providing for such a
contingency.

a tenant cannot, without the written consent of the landlord, use
the rented premises for any other purpose than that stated in the
lease.

as to repairs

in some states the law compels the landlord to keep the premises
in habitable repair, but this does not seem to be the rule. it
should be decided, where there is doubt, before signing the lease.

where it is agreed that the landlord shall keep the premises in
repair, and, after due notice of the fact, he fails to do so, the
tenant may himself make the repairs and deduct the amount from the
rent.

subletting

if there is no contract to the contrary, the tenant may sublet the
whole or any part of the premises, but this does not release him
from liability for rent.

if the tenant fails to leave the property when his lease has
expired, the owner may make his demand through what is known as a
"notice to quit," which must be served on the tenant in person.

what is a guaranty?

a guaranty is sometimes required to insure the payment of rent.

plainly, a guaranty is an agreement to assume, under certain
conditions, the liabilities of another.

if a man makes a contract, a lease, or a note, and his personal
resources are not deemed sufficient to secure his performance of
the things agreed to, the other may require that some one, in whom
he has more faith, shall give him a guaranty, or personal security
in writing.

the following might be used as the form for a guaranty for a
lease, contract, note or other obligation of contract:

    "for value received, i hereby guarantee
  the payment of the within lease (bond or
  contract).        george l. roberts."
    short hills, n. j.
      october 1, 1910.

a bill of sale

this is a written agreement by which one person transfers to
another his interest in certain personal property.

the law lays down no rule as to the form.

a bill of sale usually passes where the property paid for is not
immediately removed from the possession of the seller.

this form would answer in any state:

      "bridgeport, conn., aug. 2, 1910.
    "i have this day sold to calvin e. platt,
  of new haven, in this state, my team of
  bay horses, with their harness, one family
  carriage, and a two-seated cutter.
                    "thomas p. fletcher."

be sure, where the bill of sale includes many articles, to name
every one of them in the bill.

if paid for, whether by cash or a note, be sure to get a receipt
for the same.

obligations

a bond is a form of obligation.

every enforcible bond must be in writing and under seal.

the maker of a bond by the act acknowledges a liability in the
form of a debt or a duty.

the maker of a bond is the "obligor."

the party to whom it is made is the "obligee."

the bond names the liability or indebtedness; then follows the
condition wherein it is stated the particular thing that the
obligor is to do, or not to do.

the penalty for the non-compliance with a bond is twice the amount
of the money involved.

it is often required that the bond shall be further guaranteed by
one or more sureties. these sureties may be required to certify
that they are worth a certain sum, free and clear of all
indebtedness.

persons holding positions of financial trust, whether public or
private, may be, and most of them are, required to furnish bonds
for the faithful performance of their duties.

in the larger cities there are casualty and liability companies,
which, for a fixed or annual consideration, act as sponsors on
official and other forms of bond.

where there are no such companies, as those just named, then
private citizens of known responsibility must be secured to go on
the bond.

in every case the amount of the bond or security is measured by
the responsibilities of the man from whom it is required.




chapter xix

life insurance



life insurance may be defined to be "a contract for the future
payment of a certain sum of money to a person specified in the
body of the policy, on conditions dependent on the length of some
particular person's life."

there are two parties to this contract--the insured and the
insurer.

the purpose of the insurer, if he take out the policy in his own
name, is to provide in a measure for the care of his family, or
other dependents, in the event of his death.

after a long experience with the death rates in all lands that
keep mortuary statistics, the actuaries of insurance companies can
now estimate with surprising accuracy the probable length of life
before any man of any age.

the methods of insurance companies mean to be scientific, but be
that as it may, they are certainly interesting.

how it is done

let us take a young man of thirty, married, with one child, in
good health, and in receipt of a fair salary, but with no property
to leave his wife and little one in the event of his death.

to secure his dear ones, he decides to insure his life for, let us
say, $3,000.

he fills out the blank, in which his age and all the other
required information is given; then the insurance company's doctor
examines him and he is accepted as what is called "a good risk."

now, from its actuary tables, the company knows, with reasonable
accuracy, the number of years this young man should live, barring
accidents.

already they have their tables of calculations for such cases.
they know what expense will be required in the way of rent,
clerks, advertising, etc., to care for this case till the
prospective, the inevitable end is reached.

on these calculations the immediate and all subsequent premiums or
payments are based.

the insurance company invests and reinvests the premiums, and the
total of these, it is estimated, will meet the expenses and the
amount of the policy at the time of its calculated expiration.

as an investment

if the young man in question had the money, he would find it to
his advantage to buy a paid up policy, that is one on which no
further premiums would be required.

but, having the money for a paid up policy, could not the young
man, without any expense for clerk hire or rent, invest it, and
reinvest it with the interest, as long as he lived, and thus make
by insuring himself?

there can be no question as to that, provided always that the
young man lived out the calculated time, invested his insurance
money at once, and kept on investing it in "safe things" as long
as he lived. but how many young men are there who could or would
take this course?

it is much easier to save from our earnings than it is to invest
those earnings wisely.

forms of life insurance

the straight life policy, payable to the heirs at death, is the
form in general use, but there are others.

there is yet another form, known as the "endowment," which in
itself combines the usual life insurance with some of the
privileges of a savings bank.

the endowment policy, while payable if death should occur before a
fixed time, specifies the date when it shall be payable to the
insured himself, if he should live till that time.

in this case the family is secured, in the event of death, and the
insured has a guarantee for himself when he reaches life's
unproductive years.

the premiums on an endowment policy are necessarily greater than
those on a regular life, and the premiums increase with the
shortness of the time.

mutual insurance societies

seeing the vast sums accumulated by what are known as "the old
line companies," despite their high salaries and great expenses,
working men throughout the world, but more particularly in the
united states, have banded together and formed mutual insurance
companies.

these companies, there are many of them, are known as societies,
and their local branches are called "lodges," "councils" or a
similar name.

properly conducted, these mutual societies should be able to
furnish insurance at about actual cost, for the expenses of
management and collections are small.

it can be said that some of them have been and are being well
managed, but others, like their predecessors, the old line
companies, have unfortunately been conducted for the enrichment of
their promoters.

the mutual insurance companies, like their more pretentious
prototypes, are now placed under the supervision of inspectors in
nearly all the states.

amounts of policies

in the society companies, there is a limit to the amount, usually
$3,000, for which one can be insured, but the regular companies
have no such limitation.

in the mutual insurance companies, the insured cannot leave his
insurance to his creditors, or to any one not within a certain
degree of kinship.

in the regular companies a man may insure for any amount he thinks
he can carry, and he can insure in the same way in any number of
companies, and he can leave the money to any one he may select, or
for any purpose he may choose.

sometimes the policy is made payable to unnamed executors. these
may be named in a will made after he has taken out his policy.

policies as security

sometimes a man, without real estate or other personal assets,
desires to raise a loan on his life insurance, which, it should be
said, is a form of personal property. in this case he may assign
his life policy, or his endowment policy, as security for the
loan.

again, if he is not insured and has no shadow of an asset, he may
have his life insured for the benefit of another, in consideration
for a loan.

lapses

when there is a failure to meet premiums, the policy is said to
"lapse" or default.

even in this case the insured has an equity.

every policy, depending on the amount paid, has what is known as a
"surrender value," and by proper process this may be collected
from the company.

in some states, if the insured fails to meet his premiums, the
company is compelled to pay on the policy at his death a sum
equivalent to that which he paid before default.

some insurance policies have a clause stating that the contract
will be void in the event of the suicide of the holder. the
highest courts have set this clause aside. the ruling is that a
suicide is an insane man, and that his heirs should not be made to
suffer for his misfortune.

proprietary and mutual companies

the larger insurance companies may be either proprietary or
mutual, some are a combination of both.

the proprietary companies are corporations organized by a number
of men to conduct life insurance as a business enterprise.

such a company must be regularly chartered, and is under the
supervision of the state department of insurance.

mutual companies, as the name implies, are organized and are meant
to be managed for the benefit of the policy holders, who are also
regarded as stock holders, with the right to vote in the election
of officers and other company affairs.

aiming to create a strong reserve fund to secure the policy
holders, the mutual life insurance companies usually charge a
little more in the way of premiums.

many rich men have their lives insured for great amounts. this is
done that their heirs may not be forced to break up the estate, at
death, in order to settle the ordinary liabilities.

if it can be afforded, it is always well to carry some life
insurance.




chapter xx

fire and accident insurance



we hear and know much about life insurance because, no doubt, it
has to do directly with the individual, and so has a personal
appeal; but there are other forms of insurance, forms that have to
do with things material, that play an important part in the
world's business.

like gambling

the gambling spirit, like the desire for stimulants and the
tobacco habit, seems to be well nigh universal.

men bet on the turn of dice, the cutting of cards, or the tossing
of a coin, and we very properly denounce it as gambling. we take
money without giving an equivalent, or we part with it and have
nothing to show for the transfer.

there are insurance companies in england and in other parts of
europe where they insure risks from life to fire, from ships to
crops, and from the turning of a card to the tossing of a coin.

the english company, known the world over as "lloyd's," is ready
to insure an ocean liner, or to guarantee that the next child born
into your family will be a boy or a girl; it will even insure that
there will or will not be twins, and that, if twins, they will be
boys or girls, or one of each.

now, this looks like gambling, and you would be quite right in so
classing it, yet it is founded on the well considered law of
chance, and the premiums--call them bets--are calculated with a
mathematical precision surprising to one who has not studied the
matter.

what is fire insurance?

fire insurance is a contract between the insured and the company
taking the risk, in which for a consideration called a "premium,"
the company agrees to pay to the insured a stated sum, should the
property, named in the policy, be destroyed by fire.

if there should be a fire, during the life of the policy, and the
damage is not total, the company pays only enough to cover the
loss.

should the property be totally destroyed the company pays up to
the amount named in the policy.

no company cares to insure for the full amount of the property;
that might be an incentive to incendiarism.

in taking a fire risk, the companies base their estimates on
tables as carefully worked out and from experiences quite as well
studied as those of the actuaries of life companies.

fire companies are purely business corporations, and their conduct
is subject to the inspection of the officials of the state from
which they receive their charters.

premiums

as life companies have rates dependent on the age of the insured,
so fire companies regulate their premiums by the location and
other circumstances of the buildings; in other words, they
calculate the probabilities, and charge accordingly.

there are buildings particularly subject to combustion on which
american companies will not take a risk. among these may be
classed kerosene and turpentine stills, sulphur and powder mills,
and the buildings in which these products are stored.

buildings not used for the purposes named, but in close proximity
to them, are often considered too dangerous to warrant the
issuance of a policy.

in all cases, the company makes a careful survey of the property
to be insured, and on this report the amount of the premium is
based.

premiums on fire policies must be paid in bulk and in advance.

policies should be renewed some days before the expiration of the
old ones.

fire premiums, taking into consideration the amount to be paid,
are much lower than life premiums. we know that a man must die,
but a building may never burn down, therefore the risk is less.

collecting

a man may insure in a dozen life insurance companies, and each
must pay the amount of the policy on his death, but not so with
fire companies.

a man owning a house worth, say ten thousand dollars, can insure
it in ten companies, each taking a risk of eight thousand dollars.

if this house burns down the man does not receive eighty thousand
dollars. the actual loss is calculated and the companies divide it
up, each paying its part.

fire companies, while anxious to issue policies on every insurable
house, are more than willing that their business rivals should do
the same, as in the event of fire the burden of loss will not be
borne by one.

after every fire the company's agent examines the damage and
estimates what is saved. on this the payment is based.

insurable property

a building is classed as real estate, but personal property is
just as liable to be destroyed by fire.

fire policies can be secured on goods, furniture, machinery, live
stock and other things, and the method is about the same as where
buildings are insured, but as a rule the premiums are higher, for
such things are apt to be ruined by smoke and water, when the
building in which they are stored may not be much injured.

mutual companies

men can associate for any legal purpose, and mutual protection
against loss by fire is one of these.

in many neighborhoods throughout the country, but particularly in
the eastern states, there are mutual insurance companies, usually
composed of a number of men who know each other and who agree to
share the losses of a member, in proportions agreed to in advance.

this form of insurance is cheap and effective, but the field of
its operations is necessarily limited.

stock companies

the stock companies start with a fixed capital, each member
receiving stock in proportion to the amount contributed.

the capital and the interest from it, after paying the necessary
expenses, is invested, and reinvested, till it often reaches a
large sum.

at the end of every fiscal year, usually june 30th, the expenses
and the losses paid are deducted from the earnings and the net
gain may be divided as dividends.

often there are not only no dividends, but a great conflagration,
like that of san francisco, may wipe out all the earnings, all the
reserve and even the capital itself, leaving the company bankrupt
and heavily in debt.

great calamities cannot be foreseen. no actuary has yet appeared
to forecast the acts of providence, but on the whole our fire
insurance companies are well managed and prosperous.

accident insurance

we have insurance against storms, against the breaking of plate
glass and even against loss from burglars, but the best known of
the minor insurance societies are those known as "accident
companies."

accident policies are of many kinds, and there is no reason why
the companies, under their charters, should not extend their risks
indefinitely.

accidents against property are insured much as is destruction from
fire, but the nature of the accident as "hail," "explosions,"
"tornadoes" and "insect destruction" must be specified in the
policy.

the most popular form of accident policy is that which is sold to
travellers, and which can usually be had at the office where one
buys his ticket.

the method here is simple, and the purchase may be made in a
minute. "i want a policy for $1,000 for ten days," you say to the
clerk. he tells you the amount, you pay and get your ticket, and
there you are.

prudent men have a stamped and addressed envelope ready. into this
they push the policy, and the wife gets it. no, it does not
startle her. it is just harry's prudence and she is used to that.




chapter xxi

partnerships



if properly conducted, there is much to commend the management of
a business through partners.

never go into a partnership with a man who puts in his experience
against your capital, unless you know him like a brother.

"it lasted about a year," said a man who had done this. "now the
fellow, who has cleared out, has the capital and i have the
experience."

a partnership is an agreement between two or more persons to
associate for the purpose of carrying on a certain form of
business.

each member of a copartnership must contribute a stated
contribution to the establishment of the enterprise, but each need
not give the same amount.

neither is it necessary that the contributions of each to the firm
shall be of the same character.

one may contribute a building, another machinery, or material, and
still another money.

the shares in the profits are based on the cash values of the
different contributions.

the work of the different parties may be estimated as
contributions, but in such cases it is better to pay the worker a
fixed compensation, and charge this to the expense account.

prepare and sign

never go into a partnership based on a verbal agreement, unless it
be for the distribution of fish, game or nuts, when out with a
friend for a holiday.

have the copartnership articles carefully drawn up and signed
before you put a cent into the undertaking. a document like this
can be appealed to should disputes arise; and should a partner
die, his heirs may find it of the greatest value.

the articles should contain:

1. the amount to be contributed by each.
2. the nature of the business.
3. the time which the partnership is to last.

if the time is not specified, a partner may withdraw whenever he
pleases.

if the profits are to be equally divided, this should be stated
and provided for.

silent partners

when a man invests money in a business in the management of which
he takes no active part, he is said to be a "silent partner."

such a partner has a share in the gains and he is responsible as
the others for the firm's liabilities.

again, a man may not give money or time to a firm, but is willing,
for business reasons, that his name shall appear as if he were in
the association. in this case the man is known as a "nominal
partner."

although this man is not entitled to a share in the profits and
has no money invested, yet he can be held liable for the debts and
other obligations. the reason for this is very plain.

liability

in all matters rightly belonging to the business of a firm, any
member has the right to act, and his acts will be held binding in
law.

it is usual for partners active in a business to have each his
separate duties, but even if these duties be designated in the
articles of agreement, the outside business world is not supposed
to know anything about the relative duties of the members of a
firm as decided among themselves, so it is decided that each is
empowered to act for his partners.

under the usual articles, it is stipulated that while a dual
partnership lasts, neither of the members shall make a note, sign
a bond, or enter on any outside obligation as an individual
without having secured the written consent of his business
associates.

each partner in a firm is liable with the others for all the
business indebtedness.

if a firm fails, and the assets are found not sufficient to
satisfy the creditors, they can levy for satisfaction on the
private property of one or all of the partners.

if a member of a firm should become so far indebted, as an
individual, that he cannot comply with his obligations, the
interest he holds in the firm may be disposed of and applied to
the payment of his debts.

this does not mean that the creditors may take or seize on any
particular thing which the firm holds jointly, but that the
debtor's interest in the concern may be so disposed of. all this
the law has provided for.

a new partner admitted into a firm cannot be held responsible for
the debts of the old concern.

how to dissolve

every partnership agreement must provide for and distinctly state
the period for which it is to continue.

at the end of the period named, the partnership is dissolved by
limitation.

if the partnership is to continue, a new agreement must be made
and signed.

on proper application, a partnership may be dissolved by an order
of the court.

if a member who has become objectionable to his partners should
not agree to a dissolution of the firm, the partners may apply to
a court of competent jurisdiction for a decree of dissolution.

no member of a firm can withdraw at his own option. the consent of
the other partners is necessary, and before he is released he must
provide for his share of the obligations.

notice of dissolution should be published, and notices sent to
agents and others interested.

the following is the customary form of notice:

     the copartnership heretofore existing
  between john smith, harry roberts and
  thomas allen, under the firm name of
  smith, roberts & co., is this day
  dissolved by mutual consent.
                            john smith.
                            harry roberts.
                            thomas allen.
  june 30, 1910.

special partnerships

limited or special partners are not recognized in some states.

this is a method of association whereby a person joins a
partnership, putting in a sum agreed on, and which he may stand to
lose as an investment. he is entitled to a _pro rata_ in the
profits, but he cannot be held for the debts.

in some countries marriage is regarded as a civil contract or form
of partnership, subject to dissolution by the courts.




chapter xxii

investments



it is a remarkable fact that many men who have shown remarkable
shrewdness in conducting a business in which a fortune may have
been accumulated, exhibit the judgment of children when it comes
to making investments.

there are able lawyers who have made fortunes in the practice of
the profession which they understood, only to lose them by
investments in mines or other ventures, about which they knew
absolutely nothing but what was told them by the scheming
speculator and smooth-tongued promoter.

as has been intimated before in these pages, there is a great
difference between saving through and hoarding through a spirit of
miserliness.

savings

every wage or salary earner, no matter how small his compensation,
should try to lay by something of that little as a provision
against the unproductive days.

no matter how small the amount a man has set aside, after paying
for life's necessities and meeting all just debts, he is to that
extent a capitalist.

the miser would hide his savings out of reach, but the man with
the foresight to save will usually have the judgment to place
these savings where they will fructify and grow, producing the
fruitage known as interest.

the young man or the young woman, or any one else who places his
little accumulations in a savings bank, has begun a form of
investment that may, if persisted in, place him or her above want,
even if it does not entitle either to a place on the lists of
great capitalists.

capitalists

the capitalist not only has money of his own to invest, but he may
and very often does need more money properly to exploit the
enterprises in which he is engaged.

money loaned to such men, after being assured of their ability and
integrity, is an advantage to the lender as it is to the user.

the lender's profit is assured if the enterprise does not fail,
and the added capital not only insures against failure, but it may
enable the manager to succeed beyond any expectations he could
have if forced to carry on the work with only his own resources.

the capitalist may choose to buy land in the suburbs of a city and
build thereon a house to be sold or rented. this should always be
made to secure the money borrowed.

a capitalist may establish a fund from which, on good security,
the business men of the community may obtain loans, for which they
get a higher interest than that which they undertake to pay to
those whose money they are using.

again a capitalist may undertake to loan to farmers, who have not
the means to carry on the work, but who are anxious to make their
lands more productive, through drainage and crop rotation. in this
case the money loaned is secured by the usual bond and mortgage.

or it may be that another body of men is anxious to start a great
manufacturing enterprise in the neighborhood, but has not enough
money to place the venture on a paying basis.

in the latter case it appeals to the capitalist, and he, though
not bearing enough available means of his own, undertakes the work
with the knowledge that he can rely on the small investors, whose
contributions he has before managed successfully.

stockholders

or it may be that the manufacturing company does not ask the
capitalist to assist, but itself goes to the small investor with a
prospectus of the enterprise, and offers to sell stock in the
concern at $50 or $100 a share, as the case may be.

this gives a chance to enjoy the profits, be they great or small;
but with the chance for larger profits there comes the greater
risk which must always be assumed in such cases.

sometimes, when a company is starting, its stock may be put below
par. this stock, in the event of success, may appreciate, as with
some bank and other corporation stocks, many times above the par
value.

when stocks sell in the open market for their face value, they are
said to be at par.

kinds of stocks

most companies, organized on a stock basis, issue stocks of two
kinds. one is known as "common" the other as "preferred."

as the name implies, preferred stock (its rate of interest is
always fixed) is entitled to be paid out of the net dividends
first.

whatever is left after paying the preferred stock interest is
divided up equally among the shares of common stock, each getting
according to his holdings.

sometimes the dividends on common stock are far greater than those
on the preferred. the preferred stock dividends are regarded as a
fixed charge, but there can be no limit as to the payments on the
common stock, if the funds are available.

the stocks of railroads, factories, banks and other enterprises
may be good forms of investment, and for this they are often held
for long periods by investors for revenue.

most stocks, however, particularly of railroads, are continually
changing hands. the buying and selling of such securities has
grown to be an enormous business, managed largely by men known as
"stock brokers," many of whom are strong factors in the financial
world.

as a rule, the buying and selling of stocks through brokers is a
hazardous form of speculation, which has in it all the elements of
gambling, and we cannot advise too strongly against it.

there is another kind of stock, which some companies keep in their
safes to meet an emergency. this is known as "treasury stock,"
and, like the preferred, its rate of interest is fixed.

let us suppose that a company is capitalized and prints stock to
the amount of $100,000.

this company sells $80,000 worth, and the officers believe that
they can force the enterprise to success with the money on hand.

now, it follows that, with the same amount of earnings, the
profits on $80,000 will be greater than on $100,000, so the
$20,000 unsold stock is held in reserve.

if to extend the business, or for any other reason, it is
necessary to have more money, the treasury stock may be sold to
secure the extra capital.

if the business is placed on a basis where its success is beyond
all question, then the treasury stock may be divided _pro rata_
between the holders of the other stock, for, till disposed of in
some way, it was an asset common to the whole company.

each stock certificate tells when dividends are declared; they may
be paid quarterly, half yearly, or annually.




chapter xxiii

bonds as investments



the best way in which savings can be invested is to use them in
the extension of the business in which they were made.

the wage earner and the man on a salary cannot, of course, do
this, but the farmer, the small tradesman, and the mechanic, who
is his own employer, may be able to do so. and so, before looking
for a field for investment outside, such men should look about
them and consider how best the money may be used right on the
ground.

as to bonds

but after considering the points suggested, the man who has some
money may not be able to find a secure and profitable place for it
in or near his own home. one of the safest forms of investments is
bonds, though, as with other forms of security, the rate of
interest declines as the margin of safety increases.

if a well-established stock company should wish for any reason to
increase its available cash, it may issue bonds, or certificate of
indebtedness, bearing from four to five per cent interest, payable
semi-annually.

these bonds may be transferred the same as stock. they are a good
form of security when it is desired to borrow money from the bank,
and for many purposes they are as available as so much cash.

such bonds are issued for a specified number of years and have
coupons attached, which are cut off when interest is due, and
presented to the treasurer of the company for payment.

these bonds are secured by a mortgage or deed of trust on all the
property of the corporation they represent.

to redeem these bonds, when due, the company annually sets apart a
sum, known as a "sinking fund," for their redemption.

such bonds are far safer than any form of the company's stock, for
they bear interest that must be met, whether or not dividends are
declared.

as with a real estate mortgage, the property pledged in the bond
should be defined.

railroad bonds

every railroad in the country has been built and equipped by the
sale of its bonds. in such cases amounts of stock of the same, or
approximately the face value of the bond, have been given to the
purchaser as a bonus or inducement. of course, the controlling
stock is always retained by the promoters; and it is through the
representation of this stock that all the business of the
corporation is carried on.

the cases are few where any money was paid directly for the
original issue of any railroad stock.

bonds sold to build a road are usually known as "construction"
bonds. there may be another bond issue for equipment--with a stock
bonus--and still other bonds, each series stating the property
pledged and the purpose for which the money from sales is to be
used.

the _christian herald_, in one of its recent financial articles,
clearly defines this species of bonds, as follows:

"railroad bonds are usually pledged by the president and treasurer
of the railroad and by the trustees, to whom the bonds are made
out, and who must defend the rights of bondholders, should the
company fail to meet any of the obligations it undertook in the
mortgage deed.

"in other words, a bond is the corporation's promissory note for
the money originally paid by the investor, with interest for the
same, to be paid to the investor in stated amounts at stated
intervals; and to guarantee its good faith in the matter, the
company pledges the bondholder an interest in certain property in
its possession. it follows that a bond has a first call upon the
property rights of the corporation; that it represents something
tangible; that it pays a definite amount of interest, and that it
may be reduced at its full value at a certain time."

buying bonds

bonds, like wheat, have their selling prices quoted from day to
day, and they are equally a thing of purchase and sale.

there are banks and brokerage firms that make a specialty of
bonds, and most of these houses are entirely reliable; still, the
novice in such things would do well to investigate for himself
before investing in any bond recommended by any seller.

it is the purpose of the seller to sell; it should be equally the
purpose of the buyer not to be "sold."

our government, state and municipal bonds speak for themselves,
and in the main require no examination as to the security, though
there have been cities and even states that have defaulted in
their payments.

bond houses and banks of established reputation cannot afford to
deceive; they receive their compensation in the way of commissions
on sales, and their characterization of the bonds may be accepted
without question, for they invariably investigate the bonds,
before they lend their names to them by offering them for sale.

if there is any doubt in the mind of the would be purchaser as to
the character of the seller, that should be the first thing
investigated.

what the buyer must satisfy himself of is:

1. who is the seller?
2. what do the bonds represent?
3. are they negotiable? and
4. can they be sold again for about their face value?

every one who has saved money, it is to be supposed, has a bank
account and is acquainted with the president of his local bank.
when in doubt, the advice of such a man may be of great help.




chapter xxiv

things to remember



if a man is making a living he should not change his business
after he has passed middle life, unless, indeed, he has a
guarantee that the new venture will be greatly to his advantage.

the best business for the average man is that which affords him
the most pleasure in carrying it on, or at least with which he is
most familiar.

happiness in one's work means far more than the accumulation of a
fortune in discomfort.

don't deceive yourself

having made your credit and business standing good, keep them good
by an adherence to the same course.

if you can avoid it, do not loan your name to every needy friend
that comes along. your neighbors question your good judgment every
time you have to meet a note which you were coaxed into endorsing.
you would have saved yourself by loaning the money outright.

do not deceive yourself into the belief that you are making money
when, as a matter of fact, you may be losing.

you buy an article for two dollars and sell it for two and a half,
and you say to yourself: "there is fifty cents made." but is it?
let us see.

before crediting your business with that fifty cents, you should
have considered these points.

1. the loss of interest on that two dollars.
2. your own time or other time paid for.
3. the capital invested in things not sold.
4. the rent.
5. the transportation, insurance, heat, light, bad accounts,
unsalable goods, taxes, public donations, and the flood of items
that go to swell the outlay of every merchant, whether in the
great city or at the country crossroads.

weeding out

every man in trade should make an inventory of his stock at least
once a year. having done this, he should give his stock a fresh
appearance, whether new goods be added or not, by relegating to
the scrap heap, cellar or the garret all the dingy, dirty,
disreputable stuff that he could not sell or give away, and which
has induced sore eyes whenever seen.

keep a stock book.

quite as important as keeping the stock in order is keeping the
books in good shape.

at least once a year the books should be weeded out. why carry as
bills collectable accounts which you have been assured, for years,
would never be paid?

wipe them out and charge them to profit and loss.

where machinery is used, it is a good plan to charge off every
year ten per cent of the cost; this to make good the loss from
wear and tear.

it is only by annual house cleanings and account clearings that
you can tell about how you stand.

let your wife know

it is usually wise for a woman, married or single, to keep her
real estate and her money, if she have any, in her own name. so
also with property bought with her money.

in these cases the woman should deal with her husband, or the
members of her family, the same as she would with strangers with
whom she is transacting business.

some may say that this suggests a want of confidence and a lack of
that affection that should exist between husband and wife or near
kinsfolk. such an objection is sheer sentimentality. be as open
handed and generous as you will with your loved ones, but when it
comes to business, let the work be done in a strictly business way
or not at all.

many a good business has gone to ruin after the death of the owner
and manager because he had kept his wife in blank ignorance of his
affairs and the way in which he conducted them.

many a business, that just dragged along till the death of the
manager, has sprung into new life when the widow took charge. this
must in part be credited to natural ability and inborn pluck and
energy, but even these gifts could not have availed if the woman
had been left in ignorance of business methods.

women, like men, are awkward in new positions, not so much from a
want of ability as a lack of experience.

put the average man suddenly in charge of a house, and he will
soon demonstrate his helplessness. the woman's deftness comes from
her experience.

as far as it is possible, every husband should post his wife as to
his methods of doing business.

he should not keep her ignorant of his financial affairs.

if he conceal from her the amount of his secure holdings, it may
be that he hopes to surprise her at his death, or long before that
event. but if he have any regard for his family, he should not
hide from her the obligations which may spell ruin if the wife is
not prepared in advance to meet them.

whether the husband lives or dies, the wife must still care for
the children and attend to her never-lessening household duties.
think of her as taking on the added burdens of a business of which
she is ignorant.

there are many prosperous husbands to whom what has just been said
will not apply, but if you should ask them the secret of their
success they will not hesitate to tell you that when they married
they took their wives into full partnership, business secrets and
all.

children and business

when you send your children to school it is that the training
there received may qualify them to fight the better the ceaseless
life battle.

of course, we should not regard all education from a business
viewpoint. money apart, learning is its own greatest reward.

it widens the horizon at every step, and lifts the soul into
strength and a profounder worship. but it will not do to overlook
the business side of the training which the child should receive
in school and out of it.

it is all very well to teach children the sources of the family
revenue and the way to secure it. it is right that they should be
impressed with the dignity of labor and trained in the ways of
earning money, but it is far more important that they should be
taught how to spend money, so as to get the most good from it,
once it is earned.

the boy or girl is in a safe way to learn self-control and build
up character when he or she, with some nickels at command, can
pass a candy or a fruit shop without being compelled to spend
their cash assets.

children, wherever it is possible, should be given opportunities
for earning money, which they can feel is "really and truly" their
own.

they should not be made to feel that the money is not actually
theirs, to do with as they please, but they should be taught self-
denial, and that they must not get rid of their earnings by the
purchase of things not needed.

on the farm, children unconsciously learn much through occasional
work and constant observation, but away from the farm, boys and
girls are apt to know little or nothing of the work in which the
father, the bread winner, is engaged.

where it is possible, the children should be made familiar by
actual contact with the father's work.

this knowledge may never be used, still it will have value as a
factor in the child's training, for in our modern life all
business is inter-related.

let the youngsters know something about banks by entrusting them
there when old enough.

teach them to keep accounts of their own little money affairs,
their earnings, their expenditures, and their balances.

if they should borrow, even a cent, see that they return it at the
time agreed on. impress on them the fact that debt is a burden
which it is well to get rid of as soon as possible, if one would
stand erect and be entirely free.

all this can be quietly inculcated into the mind of the child
without making him old-fashioned or miserly. the more he knows of
the world the more he can enjoy it in a wholesome way.




chapter xxv

worth knowing



if things are said in this chapter that seem like a repetition of
things already told, it is that their importance warrants a
repetition in another form.

over-generosity

"there are no pockets in a shroud," it is said. true it is that we
cannot take material things with us to the other side of the
grave, and so before the end comes it is well to make preparations
for their disposition.

there are three ways of getting possession of property:

1. to have it given.
2. to earn it.
3. to steal it.

we shall not consider the last method; that is the business of the
law, but let us look at the first.

property is given in two ways:

1. by direct gift from one to another.
2. by will, when the amount is payable on the death of the donor.

of course, the widow and children, if there be any, are first to
be considered in either of the cases named.

many people, when the end is nearing, think that it is better to
make sure that their wealth will reach the right hands by giving
it direct and at once.

now, no matter the nobility of the motive that prompts such an
act, it is one which, on the whole, cannot be commended.

it is all very well to spend available means in order to set a son
or daughter up in business, but such sums, if there are other
heirs, should be charged against the share of the probable donee,
with interest, and a record made of the same.

under no circumstances should old people, who, after raising a
family and living honorable lives, have saved enough to own their
home and secure an income for their declining years, deed or give
this property to their children, or to any one else, in
consideration of their having all their subsequent wants met.

the better way for the farmer, the merchant, or the manufacturer,
when he feels the years pressing heavily and that he can no longer
attend properly to the old demands on him, is to shift by a
properly drawn contract the business management of the enterprise
to his children, or to those whom he wishes to place in charge.

in this way the ownership is not changed, and if the new
management should prove to be inefficient, it can be placed in
more efficient hands.

care of wills

as has been said, every person having property of any kind to
dispose of should make a will.

already ways have been given as to how wills should be made and
estates administered, but to these it may be well to add another
point.

do not imagine that the making of a will shortens life.

too often, after the demise of a testator who it is known has made
a will, the heirs cannot find the document, and the lawyer who
drew it knows nothing more about it.

many men leave their wills with their lawyers. if this should not
be done, then it would be well to keep it in the safe of the bank
in which the testator has his account.

but whether in these places or another, there should be no doubt
as to the existence of a will, or the place in which it may be
found.

only the last will should be kept; all preceding wills should be
destroyed.

care of papers

while writing about the care of wills, we are struck with the
recollection that wills are not the only papers of value that are
apt to be mislaid or lost.

never pay out money without taking a receipt, and never receive
money without giving one.

you are not responsible for the care of the receipts you give, but
you certainly are for the receipts you receive.

the trained business man has a place for everything, but there is
no reason why the man not so well trained should have to turn his
shop or his home upside down every time he wants a paper that
proves he has paid a bill, which he must pay again if that receipt
is lost.

everything may be regarded as "lost" that cannot be found, even if
you are sure "it is about somewhere."

no valuable paper should be "about." the only place for it is just
where you can lay your hand on it when wanted.

in addition to keeping your papers where they can be found the
instant they are wanted, see to it that every paper is self-
explanatory and clear of meaning on the face of it.

checks and stubs

it has been advised that the stub be always filled out before the
check, and that the check be then copied from the stub. this
course will greatly lessen the chances of disagreement between the
two.

when the last check in the book has been filled and torn out, do
not throw away the stubs. they contain important data and may be
of use in proving payment should a question arise.

in like manner, never destroy the cancelled checks handed you by
the cashier when your bank account has been balanced. each of
these checks, if drawn to order as it should be, is a receipt, a
voucher, for some payment that may possibly be demanded again.

be on the safe side.

sending away money

it may be well to repeat again, in more condensed form, just how
money may be safely sent to a distance.

1. by bank draft, payable to your order and endorsed over to the
person whom you wish to pay. the party receiving the draft must
endorse it before he can collect, and this endorsement is a
receipt for the money, as the cancelled draft must eventually come
into your possession.
2. you can buy an express order up to fifty dollars, but you may
send money in a package to any amount. only banks or large dealers
in money do this. like the bank draft, the express order must be
endorsed by the receiver, and the express company returns it to
you, when it becomes a receipt.
3. by post office orders, up to one hundred dollars.
4. by postal notes, in small amounts.
5. by telegraph.
6. by transmitting a personal check.
7. by a trusted messenger authorized to get a receipt.

the bank draft is the very best way of transmitting money.

as has been said, drafts can be bought at any bank, and they
should always be made payable to your order.

you want to pay a bill of goods to lloyd, smith and company, new
york, so you sign on the back of your draft for the amount:

      pay to the order of
  lloyd, smith and company,
      henry c. robbins.

lloyd, smith and company must endorse the draft before it can be
cashed. the draft, after payment, is returned to you, and it
becomes the best form of receipt.

lost in mails

were you ever at the dead letter office in washington? if you have
never paid such a visit, you can form no conception of the tons,
the hundreds of thousands of letters and parcels that are lost
every year in the mails.

unaccounted for drafts, checks, postal orders, books, jewelry,
medicine, everything, indeed, that the mails will agree to carry,
may be found piled in that cemetery of lost communications, the
dead letter office.

have you added to the mortuary list?

all these deaths, like many of living creatures, are due to
carelessness.

as a rule, the sender is to blame. he has misdirected. he has
placed papers not properly folded in the envelope and then
neglected to seal it. he has neglected to write any address at
all, and dropped the letter into the box. again he has addressed
the parcel, but neither men nor angels can decipher the writing.

more about notes

the note, as has been said, is one of the most usual forms of
obligation, yet misunderstandings often arise as to its
settlement.

here are the points that must be attended to, nor shall we offer
any excuse for repeating them collectively:

1. the date and amount must be so plainly written as to leave no
doubt as to either.
2. the rate of interest, if any, must be clearly expressed.
3. the post office address of the signer or signees must be
written opposite the name.
4. the note should be made payable at a definite place and on a
definite date.
5. in taking a note or other obligation from a person who cannot
write, be sure to have his "x" mark witnessed.

should you receipt certificates of stock as security for the
payment of a note, or the payment of any other debt, be sure to
notify the company issuing them.

in giving this notice, which should be done at once, state clearly
the number of shares you hold, the number of the certificates and
to whom issued.

the enforcement of this rule will depend altogether on the
character of the person with whom you are dealing.

never, if you can help it, buy a past due note, especially if it
is not secured by a mortgage.

if a note, which a third party has endorsed, becomes due, never
agree to an extension of time without getting the written consent
of the endorser.

many men have lost through their ignorance of this essential
transaction.




chapter xxvi

look before you leap



we are not quite through with the note.

when making a payment of principal or interest on a note, be sure
to take a receipt for the amount, stating specifically what the
payment is to be credited to. in addition, if it be possible, see
that the sum paid be endorsed on the back of the note itself.

the endorsement of the sum paid on the back of the note bars its
being negotiated for more than the amount actually due.

sometimes the owner and the maker of a note live at points some
distance apart. if you were the maker of the note, and wanted to
make a payment, but wished to avoid the expense and annoyance of a
trip, what should be done?

in this case a good plan would be to write to the owner of the
note, asking him to send it by a certain bank in your neighborhood
where you can pay. the bank will receive the cash, make the
endorsement in your presence, and then send its check for the
amount with the note to the owner.

you must pay the cost of this transaction.

or you may send the amount to be credited on your note, through a
bank draft, as already indicated.

never destroy a cancelled note.

notes in bank

if you have money at a bank your note will form the chief evidence
of indebtedness and be the paper for which the security is
pledged.

keep careful track of the date of payment and the amount. there
must be no neglect or carelessness.

never permit your note to go to protest.

if for any reason payment cannot be made at the time fixed, then
the better way is to go, as soon as this is learned, to the bank
or other holder of the note, and frankly explain the situation.

bankers are not shylocks. they realize that good and responsible
men are often disappointed in their collections, or in the payment
of a sum on which they depended for the settlement of their
account with the bank, and in such a case they are usually willing
to grant an extension.

private individuals, as note holders, should be treated in just
the same way.

well to know

when calling at a bank for your note, always give the exact date
on which the note falls due.

if the note belongs to another party, and is held by the bank for
collection, then mention the name of the person to whom it was
originally given.

if the bank has sent you a written notice about the note, take the
notice with you. it will be found to contain all the desired
facts.

banks keep their own notes in one place and those of their
customers in another.

banks keep each date by itself, and can so find required notes
more readily if the owner's names and the dates are given.

discharging liens

remember a mortgage is a lien or security given for the payment of
a note.

if you get a mortgage, have it recorded at once.

if you pay off a mortgage, take it at once to the office of record
and have the discharge of the instrument properly entered on the
folio in which the mortgage is recorded.

many lawsuits have resulted from the temporary neglect of this
important duty.

be prompt, but not too prompt

sometimes a man will give a number of notes and secure them by one
mortgage.

the notes may pass into the hands of a number of people.

let us suppose that you hold one note and the mortgage, and that
the mortgagee comes to you and tenders the amount of your note,
should you then surrender the mortgage to him?

by no means, until the last note is paid that mortgage remains as
security, and the holder of it is responsible for its safety to
the holders of the other notes.

in such a case it is better to have the mortgage held by one party
for the protection of all.

be in no haste to invest

when a person not accustomed to managing money comes into the
possession of a sum that it is not safe to carry about in the
pocket, what should he do with it?

obviously the first answer to this question must be "he should put
it in the bank."

we have already given hints as to investments, and to these it is
not necessary to refer again, we are now considering another and
not an unusual phase of such a case.

young men and women of all ages are very apt to be inexperienced
in these matters. as soon as it becomes known that such people
have come into the possession of a goodly amount of cash, which
they are not considered competent to manage, it is surprising how
past acquaintances suddenly pose as old and unselfish friends,
each with a scheme for doubling the money while the owner is
looking at it.

now, there may be good, honest friends who are eager to advise and
help in a case of this kind, but they are sure to be outnumbered
by advisers who have their own little axes to grind.

our advice is "don't be in a hurry to invest. your cash is quite
safe while in bank."

but no matter how promising, do not invest your money in a
business you know nothing about, even if it does carry with it a
position and a salary.

find a good honest lawyer, despite sneers to the contrary, we
believe most men in the profession are of this character, and ask
his advice, and pay for his help if papers are to be drawn.

buying rentable real estate is usually a good investment, provided
always that the price is reasonable, the title clear, and the
chances of its advancement pretty certain.

meet your dues promptly

it is estimated that every man and woman in the united states
belongs to one or more societies of some character, and this is
not an overstatement.

every member of such an organization is such by reason of election
and the payment of dues.

if you are a member of, or a pledged contributor to, a church,
lodge, grange, or other society, you should regard the prompt
payment of your dues as sacred as any other form of obligation.

the expenses of a properly conducted church are always
considerable, even in small communities. it is a disgrace to the
christian organization that, after forcing down the pastor's
compensation to the barest cost of life's necessities, then force
him to run into debt if he and his family would live, or to be
forced continually to remind the trustees that his salary is far
in arrears.

if you belong to a lodge or other society, leave it if you
honestly feel that you cannot afford the dues. neglect to do this
and your name will be dropped from the rolls on which it never
should have been placed.

counting money

never receive money from any one without counting it. count it at
once and in the presence of the giver.

let it make no difference, banker, merchant, kinsman or friend, do
not fear to give offence, but right then and there, count the
money he gave you.

of course, these people are honest, but did it ever occur to you
that honest people often make mistakes?

whenever you pay another money, if he does not do so himself, you
should insist that he count it in your presence.

if you do this you won't lose a friend, but if you do not do it
you may make an enemy, should the man come back to say you made a
mistake and underpaid him, and you very properly refuse to honor
his claim.

ready money

do not, if you can possibly avoid it, keep money around your
house, in your place of business, or on your person.

the professional thief is ever on the watch for chances to take
unto himself all the money in sight.

pickpockets reap their harvest from money carriers.

the burglar may steal or fire may destroy money left in the house.

a bank, if not near one then a safe, is the best place for money,
though safes have been broken into and robbed.

do not make a display of money at any time, but particularly in a
public place.

if you are drawing money from a bank, count it quickly and
quietly, then secure it in an inside pocket that cannot be reached
without unbuttoning.

never cash a check for a man whom you do not know to be square.

the same applies to the endorsement of checks.

in travelling

always be courteous in travelling, but never take the chance
acquaintance of the steamboat or car into your confidence.

keep an eye on the man who "fortunately is going just your way."

watch out for the fellow who knows the leading men of your town
and is a cousin of judge smith.

do not respond if such men ask you to cash a small check or make a
slight advance till his draft arrives.

do not accept the invitation of strangers to visit any place.

avoid the confidence of the over-dressed, but slightly intoxicated
young fellow who "has been out with college chums." he is not a
college man, nor has he been drinking.