
eastern europe and the muscovy company.




navigations, voyages, traffiques, and discoveries in eastern europe


part of an epistle written by one yuo of narbona vnto the archbishop of
  burdeaux, containing the confession of an englishman as touching the
  barbarous demeanour of the tartars, which had liued long among them, and
  was drawen along perforce with them in their expedition against hungarie:
  recorded by mathew paris in the yere of your lord 1243.

the lord therefore being prouoked to indignation, by reason of this and
other sinnes committed among vs christians, is become, as it were, a
destroying enemie, and a dreadful auenger. this i may iustly affirme to be
true, because an huge nation, and a barbarous and inhumane people, whose
law is lawlesse, whose wrath is furious, euen the rod of gods anger,
ouerrunneth, and vtterly wasteth infinite countreyes, cruelly abolishing
all things where they come, with fire and sword. and this present summer,
the foresayd nation, being called tartars, departing out of hungarie, which
they had surprised by treason, layd siege vnto the very same towne, wherein
i my selfe abode, with many thousands of souldiers: neither were in the
sayd towne on our part aboue 50. men of warre, whom, together with 20.
cros-bowes, the captaine had left in garrison. all these, out of certeine
high places, beholding the enemies vaste armie, and abhorring the beastly
crueltie of antichrist his complices, signified foorthwith vnto their
gouernour, the hideous lamentations of his christian subiects, who suddenly
being surprised in all the prouince adioyning, without any difference or
respect of condition, fortune, sexe, or age, were by manifolde cruelties,
all of them destroyed with whose carkeises, the tartarian chieftains, and
their brutish and sauage followers, glutting themselues, as with delicious
cates, left nothing for vultures but the bare bones. and a strange thing it
is to consider, that the greedie and rauenous vultures disdeined to praye
vpon any of the reliques, which remained. olde, and deformed women they
gaue, as it were for dayly sustenance, vnto their canibals; the beautifull
deuoured they not, but smothered them lamenting and scritching, with forced
and vnnaturall rauishments. like barbarous miscreants, they quelled virgins
vnto death, and cutting off their tender paps to present for deinties vnto
their magistrates, they engorged themselues with their bodies.

howbeit, their spials in the meane time discrying from the top of an highe
mountaine the duke of austria, the king of bohemia, the patriarch of
aquileia, the duke of carinthia, and (as some report) the earle of baden,
with a mightie power, and in battell aray, approching towards them, that
accursed crew immediately vanished, and all those tartarian vagabonds
retired themselues into the distressed and vanquished land of hungarie who
as they came suddenly, so they departed also on the sudden which their
celeritie caused all men to stand in horrour and astonishment of them. but
of the sayd fugitiues the prince of dalmatia tooke eight, one of which
number the duke of austria knew to be an english man, who was perpetually
banished out of the realme of england, in regard of certaine notorious
crimes by him committed. this fellow, on the behalfe of the most
tyrannicall king of the tartars, had bene twise, as a messenger and
interpreter, with the king of hungarie, menacing and plainely foretelling
those mischiefes which afterward happened, vnlesse he would submit himselfe
and his kingdome vnto the tartars yoke. well, being allured by our princes
to confesse the trueth, he made such oathes and protestations, as (i
thinke) the deuill himselfe would haue beene trusted for. first therefore
he reported of himselfe, that presently after the time of his banishment,
namely about the 30. yere of his age, hauing lost all that he had in the
citie of acon at dice, euen in the midst of winter, being compelled by
ignominious hunger, wearing nothing about him but a shirt of sacke, a paire
of shooes, and a haire cappe onely, being shauen like a foole, and vttering
an vncoth noise as if he had bene dumbe, he tooke his iourney, and and so
traueiling many countreyes, and finding in diuers places friendly
entertainment, he prolonged his life in this maner for a season, albeit
euery day by rashnesse of speech, and inconstancie of heart, he endangered
himselfe to the deuill. at length, by reason of extreame trauaile, and
continuall change of aire and of meats in caldea, he fell into a greuious
sicknesse, insomuch that he was wearie of his life. not being able
therefore to go forward or backeward, and staying there a while to refreshe
himselfe, he began (being somewhat learned) to commend to writing those
wordes which hee heard spoken, and within a short space, so aptly to
pronounce, and to vtter them himselfe, that he was reputed for a natiue
member of that countrey: and by the same dexteritie he attained to manie
languages. this man the tartars hauing intelligence of by their spies, drew
him perforce into their societie and being admonished by an oracle or
vision, to challenge dominion ouer the whole earth, they allured him by
many rewards to their faithfull seruice, by reason that they wanted
interpreters. but concerning their maners and superstitions, of the
disposition and stature of their bodies, of their countrey and maner of
fighting &c, he protested the particulars following to be true: namely,
that they were aboue all men, couetous, hasty, deceitfull, and mercilesse:
notwithstanding, by reason of the rigour and extremitie of punishments to
be inflicted vpon them by their superiours, they are restreined from
brawlings, and from mutuall strife and contention. the ancient founders and
fathers of their tribes, they call by the name of gods, and at certaine set
times they doe celebrate solemne feasts vnto them, many of them being
particular, & but foure onely generall. they thinke that all things are
created for themselues alone. they esteeme it none offence to exercise
cruelty against rebels. they be hardie and strong in the breast, leane and
pale-faced, rough and huf-shouldered, hauing flatte and short noses, long
and sharpe chinnes, their vpper iawes are low and declining, their teeth
long and thinne, their eyebrowes extending from their fore-heads downe to
their noses, their eies inconstant and blacke, their countenances writhen
and terrible, their extreame ioynts strong with bones and sinewes, hauing
thicke and great thighes, and short legs, and yet being equall vnto vs in
stature: for that length which is wanting in their legs is supplied in the
vpper parts of their bodies. their countrey in olde time was a land vtterly
desert and waste, situated far beyond chaldea, from whence they haue
expelled lions, beares, & such like vntamed beasts with their bowes, and
other engines. of the hides of beasts being tanned, they vse to shape for
themselues light, but yet impenetrable armour. they ride fast bound to
their horses, which are not very great in stature, but exceedingly strong,
and mainteined with little prouender. they vse to fight constantly and
valiantly with iauelines, maces, battle axes, and swords. but specially
they are excellent archers, and cunning warriers with their bowes. their
backs are slightly armed, that they may not flee. they withdraw not
themselues from the combate, till they see the chiefe standerd of their
generall giue backe. vanquished, they aske no fauour and vanquishing, they
shew no compassion. they all persist in their purpose of subduing the whole
world vnder their owne subiection, as if they were but one man, and yet
they are moe then millions in number. they haue 60000. courriers, who being
sent before vpon light horses to prepare a place for the armie to incampe
in, will in the space of one night gallop three days iourney. and suddenly
diffusing themselues ouer an whole prouince, and surprising all the people
thereof vnarmed, vnprouided, dispersed, they make such horrible slaughters
that the king or prince of the land inuaded, cannot finde people sufficient
to wage battell against them, and to withstand them. they delude all people
and princes of regions in time of peace, pretending that for a cause which
indeed is no cause. sometimes they say, that they will make a voyage to
colen, to fetch home the three wise kings into their owne countrey;
sometimes to punish the auarice and pride of the romans, who oppressed them
in times past, some times to conquere barbarous and northren nations;
sometimes to moderate the furie of the germans with their owne meeke
mildnesse; sometimes to learne warlike feats and stratagems of the french;
sometimes for the finding out of fertile ground to suffice their huge
multitudes; sometimes again in derision they say, that they intend to goe
on pilgrimage to s. iames of galicia. in regard of which sleights and
collusions certaine vndiscreet gouernors concluding a league with them,
haue granted them free passage thorow their territories, which leagues
notwithstanding being violated, were an occasion of ruine and destruction
vnto the foresayd gouernours, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

libellus historicus ioannis de plano carpini, qui missus est legatus ad
  tartaros anno domini 1246. ab innocentio quarto pontifice maximo. incipit
  prologus in librum tartarorum.


omnibus christi fidelibus ad quos prasens scriptum peruenerit, frater
ioannes de plano carpini ordinis fratrum minorum, apostolica sedis legatus,
nuncius ad tartaros et nationes alias orientis, dei gratiam in prasenti, et
gloriam in futuro, et de inimicis suis gloriam triumphalem. cum ex mandato
sedis apostolica iremus ad tartaros et nationes alias orientis, et sciremus
domini papa et venerabilium cardinalium voluntatem, eligimus prius ad
tartaros profiscisci. timebamus enimne per eos in proximo ecclesia dei
periculum immineret. et quamuis a tartaris et alijs nationibus timeremus
occidi, vel perpetuo captiuari, vel fame, siti, algore, astu, contumelia,
et laboribus nimijs, et quasi vltra vires affligi (qua omnia multo plusquam
prius credidimus, excepta morte vel captiuitate perpetua nobis
multipliciter euenerunt) non tamen pepercimus nobis ipsis, vt voluntatem
dei secundum domini papa mandatum adimplere possemus, et vt proficeremus in
aliquo christianis, vt saltem scita veraciter voluntate et intentione
ipsorum, possemus illam patefacere christianis, ne forte subito irruentes
inuenirent eos imparatos, sicut peccatis hominum exigentibus alia vice
contigit: et fecerunt magnam stragem in populo christiano. [sidenote: annus
& 4 menses & amplius.] vnde quacunque pro vestra vtilitate vobis scribimus
ad cautelam, tanto securius credere debetis, quanto nos cuncta vel ipsi
vidimus oculis nostris, qui per annum et quatuor menses et amplius,
ambulauimus per ipsos et cum ipsis, ac fuimus, inter eos, vel audiuimus a
christianis qui sunt inter eos captiui, et vt credimus fide dignis.
mandatum etiam a supremo pontifice habebamus, vt cuncta, perscrutaremur et
videremus omnia diligenter. [sidenote: frater benedictus polonus comes
ioannis de plano carpini.] quod tam nos quam frater benedictus eiusdem
ordinis qui nostra tribulationis fuit socius et interpres fecimus studiose.


de terra tartarorum, situ, qualitate & dispositione aeris in eadem. cap. 1.

volentes igitur facta scribere tartaroram, vt lectores facilius valeant
inuenire, hoc modo per capitula describemus. primo quidem dicemus de terra.
secundo de hominibus. tertio de ritu. quarto de moribus. quinto de ipsorum
imperio. sexto de bellis. septimo de terris quas eorum dominio
subiugauerant. octauo quomodo bello occurratur eisdem. de terra possumus
hoc modo tractare. in principio quidem dicemus de situ ipsius: secundo de
qualitate: tertio de dispositione aeris in eadem. terra vero pradicta est
in ea posita parte orientis in qua oriens sicut credimus coniungitur
aquiloni. [sidenote: al. solanganorum. oceauns ab aquilone.] ab oriente
autem est terra posita. kyraiorum et etiam solangorum: a meridie sunt terra
saracenorum inter occidentem et meridiem huyrorum. ab occidente prouincia
naymanorum; ab aquilone mari oceano circundatur. hac vero in parte aliqua
est nimium montuosa, et in aliqua est campestris, sed fere tota adimxta
glarea, raro argillosa, plurimum est arenosa. in aliqua parte terne sunt
aliqua modica silua: alia vero est sine lignis omnino. cibaria autem sua
decoquunt et sedent tam imperator quam principes et alij ad ignem factum de
boum stercoribus et equorum. terra autem pradicta non est in parte
centesima fructuosa: nec etiam potest fructum portare nisi aquis
fluuialibus irrigetur. sed aqua et riui ibidem sunt pauci: flumina vero
rarissima vnde ibidem villa sunt pauca; nec aliqua ciuitates excepta vna,
qua esse dicitur satis bona; [sidenote: syra orda, curia maior
imperatoris.] nos autem non vidimus illam, sed fuimus prope ad dimidium
diem, cum apud syram ordam essemus, qua curia est maior imperatoris eorum.
et licet alias infructuosa sit, quamuis non multum tamen competenter est
alendis pecoribus apta. aer in ipsa est mirabiliter inordinatus. in media
etiam astate quando in alijs partibus solet calor maximus abundare; ibi
sunt tonitrua magna et fulgura, ex quibus homines quam plurimi occiduntur.
[sidenote: maxima niues in astate in tartaria.] cadunt etiam ibi eodem
tempore maxima niues. ibi sunt etiam frigidissimorum ventorum tam maximes
tempestates, quod cum labore vix possunt homines aliquando equitare. vnde
cum essemus apud ordam (sic enim stationes imperatoris apud eos et
principum appellantur) iacebamus in terra pra magnitudine venti prostrati,
et propter pulueris multitudinem videre minime poteramus. in ea etiam in
hyeme nusquam pluit, sed in astate: et tam modicum, quod vix potest
aliquando puluerem et radices graminum madidare. [sidenote: grando maxima.]
grando etiam ibi sape maxiina cadit. [sidenote: maxima inundatio exubita
grandinis resolutione.] vnde eo tempore quando fuit electus, et in sede
regni poni debuit imperator, nobis in curia existentibus, tanta cecidit
grando, quod ex subita resolutione sicut plenius intelleximus, plusquam
centum et quadraginta homines in eadem curia fuerunt submersi. res autem et
habitacula plura deducta fuerunt. ibi est etiam in astate subito magnus
calor, et repente maximum frigus. in hyeme vero in aliqua parte cadunt
maxima niues, in alia autem parua. [sidenote: iter quinque mensium et
dinudij.] et vt breuiter de terra concludam, magna est, sed aliter, sicut
vidimus oculis nostris, (quia per ipsam circuendam quinque mensibus et
dimidium ambulauimus) multo vilior est, quam dicere valeamus.


de formis tartarorum, de coniugio, vestibus et habitaculis eorum. cap. 2.

dicto de terra, de hominibus est dicendum. primo quidem formas describemus
personarum. secundo de ipsorum coniugio supponemus. tertio de vestibus.
quarto de habitaculis. quinto de rebus eorum. forma personarum ab hominibus
alijs est remota. inter oculos enim et genas plusquam alij homines sunt
lati. gena etiam satis prominent a maxillis. graciles sunt generaliter in
cingulo exceptis quibusdam paucis. pene omnes sunt mediocris statura. barba
fere omnibus minime crescit. aliqui tamen in inferiori labio et in barba
modicos habent crines, quos minime tondent. super verticem capitis in modum
clericorum habent coronas, et ab aure vna vsque ad aliam, ad latitudinem
trium digitorum similiter omnes radunt. qua rasura corona pradicta
iunguntur. super frontem etiam ad latitudinem duorum digitorum similiter
omnes radunt. illos autem capillos qui sunt inter coronam et prataxatam
rasuram crescere vsque ad supercilia sinunt. et ex vtraque parte frontis
tondendo plusquam in medio crines faciunt longos: reliquos vero crines
permittunt crescere vt mulieres. de quibus faciunt duas cordas, et ligant
vnamquamque post aurem. pedes etiam modicos habent. vxores vero habet
vnusquisque quot potest tenere. aliquis centum, aliquis quinquaginta,
aliquis decem, aliquis plures vel pauciores: et omnibus parentibus
generaliter iunguntur, excepta matre, filia, vel sorore ex eadem matre,
sororibus etiam ex patre: tamen et vxores patris post mortem ducere
possunt. vxorem etiam fratris alter frater iunior post mortem vel alius de
parentela iunior ducere tenetur. reliquas mulieres omnes sine vlla
differentia ducunt in vxores, et emunt eas valde pretiose a parentibus
suis. post mortem maritorum de facili ad secunda coniugia non migrant, nisi
quis velit suam nouercam ducere in vxorem. [sidenote: vestes.] vestes autem
tam virorum quam mulierum sunt vno modo formata. pallijs, cappis vel
capputijs vel pellibus non vtuntur. tunicas vero portant de bukeramo,
purpura, vel baldaquino in hunc modum formatas. a supremo vsque deorsum
sunt scissa, quia ante pectus dupticantur. a latere vero sinistro vna, et
in dextris tribus ligaturis nectuntur, et in latere et in sinistro vsque ad
brachiale sunt scissa. pellicia cuiuscunque sunt generis in eundem modum
formantur: superius tamen pellicium exterius habet pilum, sed a
posterioribus est apertum. habet autem caudulam vnam vsque ad genua retro.
mulieres vero qua sunt maritata habent tunicam valde amplam et vsque ad
terram ante scissam. super caput vero habent vnum quid rotundum de
viminibus vel de cortice factum, quod in longum protenditur ad vnam vlnam,
et in summitate desinit in quadrum: et ab imo vsque ad summum in
amplitudine semper crescit, et in summitate habet virgulam vnam longam et
gracilem de auro vel de argento seu de ligno, vel etiam pennam: et est
assutum super vnum pileolum, quod protenditur vsque ad humeros.
instrumentum pradictum est tectum de buccaramo, siue purpura vel
baldaquino: sine quo instrumento coram hominibus nunquam vadunt, et per hoc
ab alijs mulieribus cognoscuntur. virgines autem et iuuenes mulieres cum
magna difficultate a viris suis possunt discerni: quum per omnia vestiuntur
vt viri. pileola habent alia quam alia nationes, quorum formam
intelligibiliter describere non valemus. [sidenote: tabernacula.] stationes
rotundas habent in modum tentorij praparatas, de virgis et baculis
subtiliter factas. supra vero in medio rotundam habent fenestram vnde lumen
ingreditur, et vt possit fumus exire: quia semper in medio ignem faciunt.
parietes autem et tecta filtro sunt cooperta. ostia etiam de filtro sunt
facta. quadam stationes sunt magna, quadam parua, secundum dignitatem et
hominum paruitatem. quadam soluuntur subito et reparantur et super somarios
deferuntur. quadam dissolui non possunt, sed in curribus deferuntur.
minoribus autem in curru ad deferendum vnus bos; maioribus tres vel
quatuor, vel etiam plures, vel quod est magis, sufficiunt ad portandum.
[sidenote: opes in pecore.] quocunque vadunt siue ad bellum, siue alias,
semper illas deferunt secum. in animalibus sunt diuites valde: in camelis,
bobus, ouibus, capris, et equis. iumentorum tantam habent multitudinem,
quantam non credimus habere totum mundum. porcos et alias bestias minime
habent.


de cultu et de hijs qua credunt esse peccata, et de diuinationibus et ritu
  funeris eorum, et de purgationibus suorum peccatorum. cap. 3.

dicto de hominibus, dicendum est de ritu: de quo tractabimus in hunc modum.
primo de cultu: secundo de hijs qua credunt esse peccata: tertio de
diuinationibus, et purgationibus peccatorum: quarto de ritu funeris. vnum
deum credunt, quem credunt esse factorem omnium visibilium et inuisibilium.
et credunt eum tam bonorum in hoc mundo quam panarum esse factorem: non
tamen orationibus vel laudibus, aut ritu aliquo ipsum colunt. nihilommus
habent idola quadam de filtro ad imaginem hominis facta; et illa ponunt et
vtraque parte ostij stationis, et subtus illa ponunt quiddam de filtro in
modum vberis factum, et illa credunt esse pecorum custodes, et eis
beneficium lactis et pullorum prastare. alia vero faciunt de pannis
sericis, et illa multum honorant. quidam ponunt illa in pulchro curru tecto
ante ostium stationis: et quicunque aliquid de illo curru furatur, sine
vlla miseratione occiditur. duces, millenarij, et centenarij vnum semper
habent in medio stationis. pradictis idolis offerunt primum lac omnis
pecoris et iumenti. et cum primo comedere et bibere incipiunt, primo
offerunt eis de cibarijs et potu. et cum bestiam aliquam occidunt, offerunt
cor idolo quod est in curru in aliquo cypho, et dimittunt vsque mane, et
tunc auferunt de prasentia eius et decoquunt et manducant. primo etiam
imperatori faciunt idolum, quod ponunt in curru, ante quam stationem
honorifice, sicut vidimus ante ordam imperatoris istius offerunt munera
multa. equos etiam offerunt ei, quos nullus audet ascendere vsque ad
mortem. alia etiam animalia eidem offerunt. qua vero occidunt ad
manducandum, nullum os ex eis confringunt, sed igni comburunt. et etiam ad
meridiem tanquam deo inclinant, et inclinare faciunt alios nobiles, qui se
reddunt eisdem. vnde nuper contigit quod michael, qui fuit vnus de magnis
ducibus russia, cum iuisset ad se reddendum bati, fecerunt eum prius inter
duos ignes transire: post hoc dixerunt, quod ad meridiem cyngis inclinaret.
qui respondit, quod bati et seruis suis inclinaret libenter, sed imagini
hominis mortui non inclinaret, quia non licet hoc facere christianis. et
cum sape diceretur, quod inclinaret, et nollet, mandauit ei pradictus per
filium ieroslai, quod occideretur si non inclinaret. [sidenote: martyrium
michaelis ducis russia.] qui respondit, quod potius vellet mori, quam hoc
faceret, quia non liceret. at ille satellitem vnum misit, qui tam diu
contra cor eum in ventre calce percussit, quousque deficeret. tunc quidam
de suis militibus quia astabat confortans eum dixit: esto robustus quia hac
poena non diu tibi durabit, et statim sequetur gaudium sempiternum: post
hoc fuit caput eius cultello pracisum. militi vero pradicto fuit caput
etiam cultello amputatum. solem igitur lumina et ignem venerantur et
adorant, et aquam et terram, eis cibonim et potus primitias offerentes, et
mane potissime antequam comedant et bibant: quia de cultu dei nullam legem
obseruant. neminem cogunt suam fidem vel legem negare. accidit tamen dum
adhuc nuper essemus in terra quod andreas dux de saruogle [marginal note:
vel, sciruogle. andreas dux russia.] qua est in russia fuit apud bati
accusatus, quod educeret equos tartarorum de terra et venderet alias, et
cum tamen non esset probatum fuit, occisus: quod audiens iunior frater
eius, venit cum vxore occisi ad ducem pradictum bati, volens supplicare, ne
terra tolleretur eisdem. qui dixit par esse, quod vxorem fratris carnalis
pradicti duceret in vxorem: et mulieri pracepit ducere illum in virum
secundum consuetudinem tartarorum. qui respondit, quod prius vellet occidi,
quam faceret contra legem. at ille, nihilominous tradidit eam illi, quamuis
renuerat quantum posset: et duxerunt ambo in lecto, et posuerunt puerum
super illam plorantem et clamantem et cogerunt eos commisceri coactione non
conditionali, sed absoluta. [sidenote: de superstitiosis traditionibus
eorum. [greek: ethelothraeskeia.]] quamuis de iustitia facienda, vel
peccato, cauendo nullam habeant legem, nihilominus tamen habent aliquas
traditiones, quas dicunt esse peccata: quas confinxerunt ipsi et patres
eorum. vnum est, cultellum figere in igne, vel etiam quocunque modo tangere
cum cultello: vel cum cultello extrahere carnes de caldario: iuxta ignem
etiam incidere cum securi. credunt etiam quod sic auferri caput debeat
igni. item appodiare se ad flagellum, cum quo percutitur equus: ipsi enim
calcaribus non vtuntur. item tangere flagellis sagittas. item iuuenes aues
occidere, vel accipere: cum froeno equum percutere, item os cum osse alio
frangere. item lac vel aliquem potum vel cibum super terram effundere. in
statione mingere, sed si voluntarie facit occiditur: si autem aliter,
oportet quod pecunia soluatur incantatori, qui purificet eos: faciat etiam
stationem et ea qua in ipsa sunt inter duos ignes transire. sed antequam
sic purificetur nullus audet intrare vel aliquid de ipsa portare. item si
alicui morsus imponitur, et deglutire non potest, et de ore suo eijcit eum,
fit foramen sub statione, et extrahunt per illud foramen, et sine vlla
misericordia occiditur. [sidenote: [greek: atheotaes].] item si aliquis
calcat limen stationis alicuius ducis interficitur eodem modo. et multa
habent similia, de quibus longum est narrare. sed homines occidere, aliorum
terras inuadere, res aliorum accipere, quocunque iniusto modo fornicari,
alijs hominibus iniunari, facere contra dei prohibitiones et dei pracepta,
nullum est peccatum apud eos. de vita aterna et damnatione perpetua, nihil
sciunt. credunt tamen quod post mortem in alio seculo viuant, greges
multiplicent, comedant, bibant, et alia faciant, qua in hoc seculo a
viuentibus hominibus fiunt. diuinationibus, augurijs, aruspicijs,
veneficijs, incantationibus multum intendunt. et cum a damonibus ipsis
respondetur, credunt quod deus ipsis loquatur, quem deum vocant itoga: sed
comani cham, id est, imperatorem ipsum appellant, quem mirabiliter timent
et reuerentur: ac oblationes offerunt multas, et primitias cibi et potus.
secundum autem responsa ipsius faciunt vniuersa. [sidenote: cultus luna.]
in principio etiam lunationis vel plenilunio incipiunt quicquid noui agere
volunt. vnde illam magnum imperatorem appellant, eique genua flectunt et
deprecantur. solem dicunt esse matrem luna, eo quod lumen a sole recipiat.
et vt breuiter dicam per ignem credunt omnia purificari. vnde cum nuncij
veniunt ad eos, vel principes, vel qualescunque persona, oportet ipsos et
munera qua portant per duos ignes transire, vt purificentur. item si cadit
ignis de coelo super pecora, vel super homines, quod ibidem sape contingit,
siue aliquid talium euenerit eis, per quod immundos seu infortunatos se
reputant, oportet similiter per incantatores mundari. et quasi omnem spem
suam in talibus posuerunt. [sidenote: ritus funebris.] quando aliquis eorum
infirmatur, ponitur in statione eius vna hasta, et contra illam filtrum
circumuoluitur nigrum: et ex tunc nullus audet alienus postes stationum
intrare. et quando incipit agonizare, omnes recedunt ab eo; quoniam nullus
de ijs qui morti eius assistunt, potest ordam alicuius ducis vel
imperatoris vsque ad nouam lunationem intrare. cum autem mortuus est, si
est de maioribus, sepelitur occulte in campo vbi placuerit: sepelitur autem
cum statione sedendo in medio eius, et ponunt mensam ante eum, et alueum
carnibus plenum, et cyphum lactis iumentini: sepelitur autem cum eo vnum
iumentum cum pullo, et equus cum frano et sella: et alium equum comedunt et
stramine corium implent, et super duo vel quatuor ligna altius ponunt, vt
habeat in alio mundo stationem vbi moretur, et iumentum de quo lac habeat,
et, possit sibi equos multiplicare, et equos etiam in quibus valeat
equitare. aurum et argentum sepeliunt eodem modo cum ipso. currus in quo
ducitur frangitur, et statio sua destruitur, nec nomen proprium eius vsque
ad tertium generationem audet aliquis nominare. alius etiam est modus
sepeliendi quosdam maiores. vaditur in campo occulte, et ibi gramma
remouent cum radicibus et faciunt foueam magnam, et in latere illius fouea
faciunt vnam sub terra, et illum seruum quem habet dilectum ponunt sub eo,
qui iacet tam diu sub eo donec incipit agonizare, deinde extrahunt eum vt
valeat respirare, et sic faciunt ter. et si euadet, postea est liber, et
facit quicquid ei placuerit, et est magnus in statione, ac inter parentes
illius. [sidenote: idem mos sepeliendi fere in florida.] mortuum autem
ponunt in foueam, qua est in latere facta cum his qua superius dicta sunt.
deinde replent foueam qua est ante foueam suam, et desuper gramina ponunt,
vt fuerant prius, ad hoc, ne locus vlterius vileat inueniri. alia faciunt
vt dictum est. in terra eorum sunt coemeteria duo. vnum in quo sepeliuntur
imperatores, duces et nobiles omnes: et vbicunque moriuntur, si congrue
fieri potest, illuc deferuntur. sepelitur autem cum eis aurum et argentum
multum. aliud est in quo sepeliuntur illi qui in hungaria interfecti
fuerunt: multi enim ibidem occisi fuerunt. ad illa coemeteria nullus audet
accedere prater custodes, qui ad custodiendum positi sunt ibidem. et si
aliquis accesserit, capitur, spoliatur et verberatur, et valde male
tractatur. vnde nos ipsi nescientes intrauimus termmos coemeterij eorum qui
in hungaria occisi fuerunt, et venerunt super nos sagitta volantes: sed
quia eramus nuncij consuetudinem terra nescientes, nos liberos dimiserunt
abire. [sidenote: lustrationes ritus.] parentes autem et omnes alij qui
morantur in stationibus suis oportet purificari per ignem: qua purificatio
fit hoc modo. faciunt duos ignes et duas hastas ponunt iuxta ignes et vnam
cordam in summitate hastarum: et ligant super cordam illam quasdam
scissuras de buccharamo: sub qua corda et ligaturis inter illos duos ignes
transeunt homines, bestia et stationes: et sunt dua mulieres, vna hinc, et
alia inde aquam projicientes, et quadam carmina recitantes. et si aliqui
currus ibi franguntur, vel etiam res ibi cadunt aliqus, incantatores
accipiunt. et si aliquis occiditur a tonitruo, omnes illos homines qui
morantur in stationibus illis, oportet pradicto modo ignes transire.
statio, lectus, filtra, currus, vestes, et quicquid talium habuerint, a
nullo tanguntur, sed tanquam immunda ab omnibus respuuntur.


de consuetudinibus bonis et malis et cibis eorum. cap. 4.

dicto de ritu, dicendum est de moribus: de quibus tractabimus hoc modo.
primo dicemus de bonis, secundo de malis: tertio de consuetudinibus: quarto
de cibis. [sidenote: obedientia.] pradicti homines, scilicet tartari sunt
magis obedientes dominis suis quam aliqui homines in hoc mundo, siue
religiosi, siue seculares: et magis reuerentur eosdem: neque de facili
mentiuntur eis. verbis ad inuicem raro aut nunquam contendunt, factis vero
nunquam. bella, rixa, vulnera, homicidia inter eos non contingunt.
[sidenote: abstinentia.] pradones et fures magnarum rerum non inueniuntur
inter eos. vnde stationes et currus eorum, vbi habent thesauram suum setis
aut vectibus non firmantur. si aliqua bestia perduntur, quicunque inuenent
eas vel dimittit sic esse, vel ducit eas ad homines illos, qui positi sunt
ad hoc. homines autem quorum sunt bestia apud eosdem illas requirunt, et
absque vlla difficultate recipiunt illas. [sidenote: comitas.] vnus alium
satis honorat: et ad inuicem sunt satis familiares: et cibaria quamuis
inter illos sint pauca, tamen inter se satis competenter communicant illa;
et satis sunt sufferentes. [sidenote: temperantia.] vnde quum ieiunant vno
die vel duobus diebus nihil comedentes omnino de facili non videntur
impatientes, sed cantant et ludunt quasi comederunt bene. in equitando
multum sustinent frigus, et calorem nimium patiuntur. non sunt homines
delicati. inuidi ad inuicem non videntur. inter eos quasi nulla placita
sunt: nullus alium spernit, sed iuuat et promouet quantum congrue potest.
[sidenote: castitas mulierum.] mulieres eorum sunt casta: nec de
impudicitia earum inter eas aliquid auditur. verba tamen quadam ex eis in
ioco satis habent turpia et impudica. seditiones vero inter eas raro vel
nunquam audiuntur. et quamuis multum inebrientur, in ebrietate sua tamen
verbis vel facto nunquam contendunt. [sidenote: insolencia aduersus
exteros.] nunc de malis moribus eorum est supponendum. superbissimi alijs
hominibus sunt, et despiciunt omnes: ideo quasi pro nihilo reputant, siue
nobiles sint, siue ignobiles. vidimus euim in curia imperatoris nobilem
virum ieroslaum. magnum ducem russia, filium etiam regis et regina georgia,
et soldanos multos, duces etiam soldanorum nullum honorem debitum recipere
inter eos. sed tartari qui erant eis assignati, quantumcunque erant viles,
antecedebant eos, et semper primum locum et summum tenebant: immo sape
oportebat eos post posteriora sedere. [sidenote: iracundia mendacitas.]
iracundi multum et indignantis natura sunt: et etiam alijs hominibus plus
sunt mendaces, et fere nulla veritas inuenitur in eis. in principio quidem
sunt blandi, sed in fine pungunt vt scorpio. [sidenote: fraudulentia
sordes.] subdoli sunt et fraudulenti, et se possunt astutia circumueniunt
omnes. homines sunt immundi, sumendo cibum et potum, et alijs factis suis.
qui cum volunt aliquid mali facere alijs hominibus, miro modo occultant, vt
prauidere non possint, vel contra eorum astutias remedium inuenire.
[sidenote: temulentia.] ebrietas honorabilis est apud eos: et quum multum
quis bibit, ibidem reijcit, nec propter hoc dimittit quin iterum bibat.
[footnote: chief engineer melville, in his account of the adventures of the
survivors of the "jeanette" in the lena delta, gives a similar description
of the drinking customs of the inhabitants of the _tundra_.] valde sunt
cupidi et auari, exactores maximi ad petendum: tenacissimi retentores, et
parcissimi donatores. aliorum hominum occisio pro nihilo est apud illos.
[sidenote: exortio crudelitas.] et, vt breuiter dicam, omnes mali mores
eorum propter prolixitatem in scripto redigi non possunt. [sidenote: cibi.]
cibi eorum sunt omnia qua mandi possunt. comedunt canes, lupos, vulpes, et
equos; et in necessitate carnes humanas. vnde quando pugnauerunt contra
quandam ciuitatem kytaorum, [footnote: query, the inhabitants of the
province of kutais, on the euxine, or of cathay?] vbi morabatur imperator
ipsorum; eam obsederunt tam diu, quod defecerunt ipsis tartaris omnino
expensa, et quia non habebant quod manducarent omnino, tunc accipiebatur de
decem hominibus vnus ad manducandum. abluuiones etiam qua egrediuntur de
iumentis cum pullis manducant. imo vidimus etiam eos pediculos manducare:
vidimus etiam eos commedere mures. mensalibus et manutergijs non vtuntur:
panem non habent, nec olera, nec legumina, nec aliquid aliud nisi carnes:
et tam paucas habent, quod alia nationes vix inde viuere possent. cum
pinguedine carnium multum polluunt manus: quando vero comederunt, tunc
manus ad ocreas suas, vel ad gramina, vel ad aliquid talium tergunt. solent
etiam honestiores habere aliquos panniculos paruos, cum quibus vltimo
tergunt manus, quando carnes manducarunt. cibum vnius eorum incidit, et
alius accipit cum puncto cultelli morsellos, et vnicuique prebet, quibusdam
plus, quibusdam minus, secundum quod plus vel minus volunt eos honorare.
scutellas non lauant, et si aliquando cum brodio lauant carnium, iterum cum
carnibus in olla reponunt. ollas etiam vel caldaria, vel alia vasa ad hoc
deputata si abluunt, simili modo lauant. apud eos est magnum peccatum, si
de cibo vel potu perire permittatur aliquid. vnde ossa, nisi prins
extrahatur medulla, dari canibus non permittunt. vestes etiam non lauant,
nec lauari permittunt et maxime quo tonitrua ab illa hora incipiunt donec
desinant. lac iumentinum bibunt in maxima quantitate si habent: bibunt
etiam ouinum, caprinum, vaccinum, et camelorum. vinum, ceruisiam, et
medonem non habent, nisi ab alijs nationibus mittatur, vel donetur eisdem.
in hyeme, nisi diuites sint, lac iumentinum non habent. millium cum aqua
decoquunt, quod tam tenue faciunt, quod non comedere sed bibere possunt. et
vnus quisque ex eis bibit cyphum vnum vel duos in mane, et nil plus in die
manducant. in sero vnicuique parum de carnibus datur, et brodium de
carnibus bibunt. in astate autem, quia tunc habent satis de lacte iumentino
carnes raro manducant, nisi forte donentur eis, aut venatione aliquam
bestiam ceperint, siue auem. [sidenote: poena adulterij.] legem etiam siue
consuetudinem habent occidendi virum et mulierem quos in adulterio
inuenirent manifeste. similiter et virginem si fornicata fuerit, mulierem
occidunt et virum. [sidenote: furti. arcani cuulgali.] si aliquis inuenitur
in prada vel in furto manifesto in terra potestatis eorum sine vlla
miseratione occiditur. item si aliquis eorum deundat consilium, maxime
quando volunt ire ad bellum; centum plaga dantur super posteriora, quanto
maiores dare cum baculo magno vnus rusticus potest. item quando aliqui di
minoribus offendunt in aliquo a suis maioribus non parciter eis, sed
verberibus grauiter affliguntur. item inter filium concubina et vxoris
nulla est differentia, sed dat pater vnicuique eorum quod vult, et si est
de genere ducum, ita est dux filius concubina, sicut filius legitimus.
[sidenote: [greek: poligamia.]] et cum vnus tartarus habet multas vxores,
vnaquaque per se suam stationem, et familiam habet; et cum vna comedit, et
bibit, et dormit vna die, et altera die cum alia. vna tamen ex ipsis maior
est inter alias, et frequentius cum illa quam cum alijs commoratur. et cum
tam multa sint inter se tamen de facili non contendunt, viri nihil
operantur omnino exceptis sagittis: et etiam de gregibus aliquantulam
habent curam, sed venantur, et exercent se ad sagittandum: omnes enim a
paruo vsque ad magnum sagittarij sunt et boni. et statim pueri eorum, cum
sunt duorum annorum vel trium, incipiunt equitare. equos eorum regunt et
currunt in eis: et dantur eis arcus secundum suam atatem, et instruunt ad
sagittandum. agiles enim sunt et audates valde. virgines et mulieres
equitant, et agiliter in equis currunt vt viri. vidimus enim eas arcus et
pharetras portare. et tam viri quam mulieres diu in equitando possunt
durare. breuissimas habent strepas: equos valde custodiunt; imo rerum
omnium sunt magni conseruatores. [sidenote: foemina meta incognita eodem
modo vestiuntur.] mulieres eorum omnia operantur. pellicia, vestes,
calceos, ocreas, et omnia opera qua de corio fiunt. currus etiam ducunt et
reparant camelos onerant, et velocissima sunt et strenua in omnibus
operibus suis: foemoralibus omnes vtuntur: aliqua, sicut viri, sagittant.


de ipsorum imperio. cap. 5.

dicto de eorum consuetudinibus, dicendum est de eorum imperio. et primo de
ipsius principio. secundo de principibus eius. tertio de dominio
imperatoris et principum. terra quadam est in partibus orientis, de qua
dictum est supra, qua mongol nominatur. hac terra quondam quatuor populos
habuit. [sidenote: tartaria populi tartar fluuius.] et vnus yeka mongol, id
est, magni mongali vocabatur secundus sumongol, id est aquatici mongali.
ipsi autem seipsos tartaros appellabant, a quodam fluuio, qui currit per
terram eorum, qui tartar nominatur allius appellatur merkat, quartus
metrit. hij populi omnes vnam formam personarum, et vnam linguam habebant:
quamuis inter se per principes et prouincias essent diuisi. [sidenote:
cygnis ortus et res gesta.] in terra yeka mongol fuit qui vocabatur cyngis.
iste incepit esse robustus venator coram domino. didicit enim homines
furari, rapere, pradari. ibat autem ad alias terras, et quoscunque potuit
capere, et sibi associare non demittebat homines vero sua gentis ad se
inclinabat, qui tanquam ducem ipsum sequebantur, ad omnia malefacta. hic
autem incepit pugnare cum sumongol, siue tartaris postquam homines
aggregauerat sibi, et interfecit ducem eorum, e multo bello omnes tartaros
sibi subiugauit et in suam seruitutem redegit. post hac cum omnibus his
pugnauit, cum merkat, qui erant positi iuxta terram tartarorum, quos etiam
bello sibi subiecit: inde procedens pugnauit contra metritas, et etiam
illos deuicit. [sidenote: naymani.] audientes itaque naymani, quod cyngis
erat taliter eleuatus, indignati fuerant. ipsi enim habuerant imperatorem,
qui fuerat strenuus valde, cuidabant tributum omnes nationes pradicta.
[sidenote: fratres discordantes oppressi.] qui debitum vniuersa carnis
exsoluens, filij eius successerunt loco eius; sed iuuenes erant et stulti,
et populum nesciebant tenere sed inuicem diuisi erant et scissi: vnde medio
tempore cyngis erat taliter exaltatus, nihilominus, insultum faciebant in
terras superius annotatas, viros et mulieres et pueros occidebant, et
capiebant pradam eorum. cyngis hoc audiens, omnes sibi subiectos homines
aggregauit. [sidenote: kara kitai.] naymani et kara kitai, id est nigri
kitai, ex aduerso in quandam vallem strictam inter montes duos, per quam
nos euntes ad imperatorem eorum transiuimus, similiter conueniunt: et
commissum est pralium, in quo naymani et kara kitai a mongallis sunt
deuicti, et maior pars eorum occisa: et alij qui euadere non potuerunt in
seruitutem redacti sunt. [sidenote: occady-can.] in terra autem pradictorum
kara kytaorum occaday can filius cyngis can, postquam positus fuit
imperator, quandam ciuitatem, adificauit, quam omyl [marginal note: vel
chanyl.] appellauit. [sidenote: homines syluestres.] prope quam ad meridiem
est quoddam desertum magnum, in quo syluestres homines pro certo habitare
dicuntur, qui nulla modo loquuntur, nec in cruribus habent iuncturas: et si
quando cadunt, per se surgere sine adiutorio aliorum minime possunt,
aliquantam tamen habent discretionem. mongali autem in terram eorum
reuertentes se contra kytaos in pralium praparauerunt, qui castra mouentes
terram eorum intrauerunt. [sidenote: de mutua victoria mongalorum et
kytaorum. tartarorum kytama clades.] imperator autem kytaorum hoc audiens
venit contra eos cum exercitu suo; et commissum est pralium durum; in quo
pralio mongali fuerunt deuicti: et omnes nobiles mongalorum qui erant in
pradicto exercitu fuerunt occisi vsque ad septem. cyngis vero et alij qui
remanserunt in tetram suam fugerunt. et quum aliquantulum quieuisset
cyngis, praparauit se rursus ad pralium et contra terram huiyrorum
processit ad bellum. isti homines christiani de secta nestorianorum erant,
quos etiam bello deuicit, et eorum literas acceperunt. nam prius scripturam
aliquam non habebant. [sidenote: noua victoria litera.] nunc autem eandem
literam mongallorum appellant. inde processit contra terram saruiuorum
[marginal note: vel saruiur.], et contra terram karauitarum [marginal note:
vel karanitarum.], et contra terram voyrat [marginal note: vel hudirat.],
et contra terram comana, quas terras omnes deuicit. inde est in teram suam
reuersus. et cum aliquantulum quieuisset, conuocans omnibus gentibus
supradictis, contra kytaos ad bellum processit, et cum diu contra eos
pugnasset, magnam partem terra kytaorum vicerunt: imperatorem autem eorum
concluserunt in sua ciuitate maiori: quam cum tam diu obsiderunt, quod
exercitui defecerunt expensa, et cum non haberent quod manducarent,
pracipit illis cyngis can, quod de decem hominibus vnum darent ad
manducandum. illi autem de ciuitate pugnabant viriliter contra illos
sagittis et machinis: [sidenote: argentum loco lapidum in hostem
proiectum.] et cum deficerent lapides, pro lapidibus proiecerunt argentum,
et maxime liquefactum. ciuitas enim hac multis diuitijs erat plena. et cum
diu pugnassent, et eam bello vincere minime possent, fecerunt vnam magnam
viam sub terra ab exercitu vsque ad mediam ciuitatem, et aperientes subito
terram, eis nescientibus prosilierunt in medio ciuitatis, et pugnabant cum
hominibus ciuitatis, et illi qui erant extra simili modo pugnabant, et
concidentes portas intrauerant ciuitatem: [sidenote: kytai victi.] et
occidentes imperatorem et homines plures, ciuitatem possidebant: et aurum
et argentum, et omnes diuitias abstulerunt. et cum terra pradicta kytaoram
suos homines prafecissent, in terram propriam sunt reuersi. [sidenote:
cyngis salutator imperator. kyathaia pars in mari posita. kytaorum litera
et religio.] et tunc imperatore kytaoram deuicto factus est imperator.
quandam autem partem terra kytaorum, qua posita est in mari, vsque in
hodiernum diem nullatenus deuicerunt. kytai autem, de quibus superius
diximus, homines sunt pagani, qui habent literam specialem: et habent nouum
et vetus testamentum; et habent vitas patrum, et erimitas et domos quasi
ecclesias factas, in quibus orant temporibus suis: et dicunt se quosdam
sanctos, habere. vnum deum colunt: dominum nostram iesum christum honorant,
et credunt vitam aternam, sed minime baptizantur. scripturam nostram
honorant et reuerentur: christianos diligunt, et ecclesias faciunt plures.
homines benigni et humani satis videntur: barbam non habent, et in
dispositione faciei satis concordant cum mongalis, non tamen sunt in facie
ita lati. [sidenote: opificiorum laus.] linguam propriam habent: meliores
artifices non inueniuntur in toto mundo in omnibus operibus, in quibus
solent homines terra eorum est opulenta valde in frumento, vino, auro,
argento, et serico, et omnibus rebus in quibus solet sustentari humana
natura. et cum aliquantulum quieuissent, suos exercitus diuiserunt.
[sidenote: thossuch can cyngis filius comanos deuicit. india minor
debellata.] vnum de filijs tossuch nomine, quem etiam can appellabant, id
est imperatorem, misit cum exercitu contra comanos, quos multo bello
deuicit: et postquam vicerat eos in terram suam reuertabatur. alium etiam
filium misit cum exercitu contra indos; qui minorem indiam deuicerunt. hij
autem nigri sunt saraceni, qui athiopes nuncupantur. hic autem exercitus
contra christianos, qui sint in india maiori in pugnaro processit. quod
audiens rex terra illius, qui vulgo presbyter iohannes appellatur, venit
contra eos exercitu congregato. [sidenote: presbyter iohannes: eiusdem
stratagema.] et faciens imagines cupreas hominum in sella posuit super
equos, ponens ignem interius, et posuit hominem cum folle post imaginem
cupream super equum: et cum multis imaginibus, et equis taliter praparatis
venerunt contra pradictos ad pugnandum. et cum ad locum pralij
peruenissent, istos equos vnum iuxta vnum pramiserunt. viri autem, qui
erant retro, posuerunt nescio quid super ignem qui erat in pradicta
imagine, et cum follibus fortiter sufflauerunt. vnde factum est, quod de
fumo illo aer est denigratus. [sidenote: victoria de tartaris. ] et tunc
super tartaros iecerunt sagittas, ex quibus multi interfecti et vulnerati
fuerunt. et sic cum confusione eos de finibus suis eiecerunt: et nunquam
audiuimus, quod vltra ad eos redierunt. [sidenote: de monstrosis mulieribus
et canibus monstrosa narratio.] cum autem per deserta redirent, in quandam
terram venerunt in qua quadam monstra foemineas imagines habentia
reperirunt. et cum interrogassent eas per multos interpretes vbi essent
viri terra illius, responderunt quod in illa terra quacunque foemina
nascebantur, habebant formam humanam: masculi vero formam caninam. et dum
moram protraherant in terra pradicta, canes in alia parte conuenerunt in
vnum: et dum esset hyems asperrima, se omnes proiecerunt in aquam: et post
hac incontinenti in puluerem mouebantur, et ita puluis admixtus aqua super
eos congelauit: [sidenote: glacies.] et dum sape; hoc fecissent, glacies
densa facta est super eos: vnde cum magno impetu cum tartaris conuenerunt
ad pugnam. at illi quum sagittas super eos iactabant, ac si super lapides
sagitassent, retro sagitta redibant: alia etiam arma eorum in nullo eos
ladere potuerunt. canes vero insultum facientes in eos morsibus
vulnerauerunt, multos etiam occiderunt, et ita eiecerunt eos de finibus
suis. [sidenote: burutabeth regio.] et dum reuerteretur exercitus ille,
venit ad terram burutabeth, quos bello vicerunt: qui sunt pagani. qui
consuetudinem mirabilem imo potius miserabilem habent. quia cum aliquis
patrum suorum humana natura debitum exsoluit, omnem congregant parentelam,
et comedunt eum. [sidenote: incolarum mores.] isti pilos in barba non
habent: immo quoddam ferrum in manibus portant, cum quo barbam semper
depilant, si forte aliquis crinis crescit in ipsa: et multum etiam deformes
sunt. inde exercitus ille reuertebatur in terram suam. [sidenote: terra
kergis orientalis.] cyngis can etiam eo tempore quo diuisit exercitus
illos, misit in expeditione contra orientem per terram kergis, quos bello
non vicit: et vsque ad caspios montes peruenit, montes autem illi sunt de
lapide adamantino. vnde eorum sagittas et arma ferrea ad se traxerant.
homines inter caspios montes conclusos viderunt, quia iam montem fregerunt:
sed nubes quadam erat posita ante ipsos, ad quam accedere non poterant vllo
modo quia statim moriebantur, cum perueniebant ad illam. [sidenote: nota
iter duorum mensium versus orientem.] sed antequam peruenirent ad pradictum
montem plusquam per mensem vastam solitudinem transierunt. inde procedentes
adhuc contra orientem plusquam per mensem per magnum desertum iuerunt. et
peruenerunt ad quandam terram, vbi viderunt vias tritas, sed nullum hominem
noterant inuenire. [sidenote: troglodyta.] sed tantum quasiuerant per
terram, quod inuenerunt hominem cum vxore sua; quos ante cyngis can
adduxerunt. et cum interrogasset vbi essent homines terra illius,
responderunt quod in terra sub montibus habitarent. at cyngis can retenta
vxore misit viram illum cum nuncijs suis mandans hominibus illis vt
venirent ad mandatum ipsius. illi vero euntes ad eos, narrauerunt omnia qua
cyngis can mandauerat. qui responderunt quod tali die venirent ad mandatum
suum faciendum. medio vero tempore congregauerunt se per vias occultas sub
terra et venerunt contra istos ad pugnandum: et irruentes subito super eos
plurimos occiderunt. at illi, cyngis can videlicet et sui fugam ineuntes,
terram exierunt pradictam. illos tamen homines, virum scilicet et mulierum
secum duxerunt, qui vsque ad mortem in terra tartarorum fuerunt. [sidenote:
videtur hic sonitus fieri, et fragore glaciei, et niuium de montibus.]
interrogati vero quare sub terra habitarent, dixerunt quod vno tempore anni
quum sol oritur, tantus souitus est, quod homines nulla ratione possunt
sustinere. immo etiam tunc percutiebant in organis et tympanis, et alijs
instrumentis, vt illum sonitum non audirent. [sidenote: cyngis lex.] et dum
cyngis de terra illa reuerteretur, defecerunt ei victualia et habebant
maximam famem. et tunc recentia interiora vnius bestia eos contigit
inuenire: qua accipientes, depositis tamen stercoribus decoxerunt: et coram
cyngis can portantes cum suis illa comedit. et ex hoc statutum fuit ab eo,
vt nec sanguis, nec interiora, nec aliquid de bestia quod manducari potest,
exceptis stercoribus, proijciatur. et deinde in terram propriam est
reuersus: et ibidem leges et statuta multiplicia iecit, qua tartari non
violabiliter obseruant. ex quibus tantum duo dicemus. vnum est, quod
quicunque in superbia erectus, propria authoritate sine electione principum
esse voluerit imperator, sine vlla miseratione debet occidi. vnde ante
electionem ipsius cuynch propter hoc vnus de principibus, nepos ipsius
cyngis can fuit occissus. volebat enim sine electione regnare. aliud
statutum est, quod sibi debent subiugare omnem terram: nec cum aliqua gente
debent pacem habere, nisi prius eis subdatur, quo vsque veniat tempus
occisionis eorum. debent enim occidi, vt prophetatum est eis: et illi qui
euadere poterunt, vt dicunt, debent illam legem tenere quam tenent alij,
qui eos bello deuincunt. statuit etiam quod per millenarios, et centenarios
et decanos debeat eorum exercitus ordinari. [sidenote: interitus.] post hoc
ab ictu tonitrui esc occisus, peractis suis ordinationibus and statutis.
hic autem habuit quatuor filios: vnus vocabatur occoday, secundus tossuch
can, tertius thaaday et nomen quarti ignoramus. [sidenote: liberi.] isti
quatuor filij cum alijs maioribus qui tunc erant, primum filium videlicet
occoday elegerunt imperatorem, filij autem istius occoday cuyne, qui nunc
est imperator, cocthen et cyrenen. [sidenote: nepotes.] et si plures
habuerit filios ignoramus. filij autem tossuch can bati: iste est ditior et
potentior post imperatorem: ordu, iste est senior omnium ducum: syban,
bora, bercuthanth: aliorum filiorum tossuch can nomina ignoramus. filij
thaaday sunt burin et chadan, nomina aliorum filiorum nescimus. alterius
autem filij cyngis can, cuius nomen nescimus, filiorum nomina sunt hac.
vnus vocatur mengu, cuius mater est seroctan. ista domina inter omnes
tartaros, excepta matre imperatoris, est magis nominata: et potentior est
omnibus excepto bati. alius vocatur becas. alios filios habuit plures, sed
eorum nomina ignoramus. [sidenote: duces.] hac sunt ducum nomina. ordu:
iste fuit in polonia et in hungaria: bati, cathan, syban, bureth. omnes
isti fuerunt in hungaria, cyrpodan iste est adhuc vltra mare contra
soldanum damasci. isti remanserunt in terra: mangu, cuthen, syrennen,
hybilay, syremum, synocur, thuatamur, cyragay, sybedey, senex quidam miles
inter eos, bora, berca, mauci, choranca: sed iste inter alios est minimus.
alij vero duces sunt plures, sed eorum nomina ignoramus.

[sidennote: imperatoris tartarorum seruile in omnes imperium.] imperator
autem tartarorum habet mirabile dominium super omnes. nullus audet in
aliqua parte morari, nisi ipse assignet ei. ipse autem assignat vbi maneant
duces: millenarij centenarijs. centenarij decanis. insuper quicquid
pracipitur in quocunque tempore quocunque loco, siue ad bellum, siue ad
mortem, siue ad vitam, sine vlla contradictione obediunt. etiam si petit
filiam virginem vel sororem, sine contradictione dant ei. aut singulis
annis, aut intermissis aliquibus annis virgines colligit ex omnibus finibus
tartarorum. si ipse vult sibi retinere aliquas retinet: alias dat suis
hominibus, sicut videtur ei expedire. nuncios quoscunque quotcunque et
vbicunque transmittit, oportet quod dent ei sine mora equos subdititios et
expensas. vndecunque venerint ei tributa vel nuncij, oportet quod equi,
currus, et expensa similter dentur eis. [sidenote: inhumanitas erga
legatos.] nuncij qui veniunt aliunde in magna miseria sunt in victu pariter
et vestitu: quia expensa viles sunt et pauca: et maxime cum veniunt ad
principes, et ibi debent moram contrahere. tunc ita parum datur decem
hominibus, quod inde vix possint viuere duo. nec etiam in curijs principum,
nec in via datur eis comedere, nisi semel in die, et satis parum. insuper
si aliqua iniuria sibi fiunt, conqueri de facili minime possunt. vnde eos
oportet illa patienter portare. insuper multa tam a principibus, quam ab
alijs nationibus et minoribus ab eis exiguntur: et si non daretur, vili
pendunt eos, immo quasi pro nihilo habent eos. et si a magnis viris
mittuntur, nolunt ab eis modicum munus habere: sed dicunt: a magno homine
venistis, et cur modicum datis? et accipere dedignantur. et si nuncij bene
volunt facere facta sua, oportet eos dare maiora. idcirco magnam partem
rerum, qua nobis a fidelibus erant data, oportuit nos de necessitate
muneribus dare. et sciendum, quod ita omnia sunt in manu imperatoris
pradicti, quod nemo audet dicere, hoc est meum vel illius; sed omnia sunt
imperatoris, res, iumenta, et homines. et super hoc etiam nuper emanauit
imperatoris statutum. idem dominium per omnia habent duces super homines
suos. diuisi enim sunt homines tartari, videlicet etiam alij inter duces.
nuncij etiam ducum, quocunque eos transmittunt, et homines tam imperatoris
quam alij omnes equos subdititios et expensas, et qui equos custodiant, et
etiam nuncijs seruiant sine contradictione dare tenentur. imperatori autem
iumenta vt habeat ex eis lac ad annum vel ad duos, vel ad tres, sicut
placuerit ei, tam duces quam alij pro redditu dare tenentur. et homines
ducum idem facere tenentur dominis suis. inter eos enim nullus est liber.
et vt breuiter dicam, quicquid imperator et duces volunt, et quantum volunt
de rebus suis accipiunt. de personis etiam eorom disponunt per omnia, sicut
volunt. [sidenote: occaday secundus imperator tartarorum.] mortuo
imperatore, sicut superius dictum est, conuenerunt duces et elegerunt
occoday filiam cyngis can pradicti imperatorem. qui habito consilio
principum diuisit exercitus. bati, qui in secundo gradu attinebat ei, misit
contra altisoldanum, et contra terram biserminorum. hij erant saraceni, et
komanicum loquebantur. et cum intrasset terram illorum pugnauit contra eos,
et bello eos sibi subiecit. quadam autem ciuitas qua barthra [marginal
note: barthra ciuitas vel barchin.] dicitur, diu restitit ei, fecerant enim
foueas multas in circuitu ciuitatis et operuerant illas; et quando illi
veniebant cadebant in foueas. vnde non potuerunt capere ciuitatem, donec
illas foueas replessent. homines autem de quadam ciuitate qua vocatur
iakint [marginal note: vel sarguit.] hac audientes exierunt obuiam eis, se
sponte in manus eorum tradentes: vnde ciuitas eorum non erat destructa, sed
plures eorum occiderunt, et alios transtulerunt. et accepto spolio
ciuitatis, ipsam alijs hominibus repleuerunt. [sidenote: orna super don
fluuium.] et venerunt contra ciuitatem qua vocatur orna. ista ciuitas erat
nimium populosa: christiani ibi erant plures; gazari videlicet, rutheni, et
alani, et alij: nec non et saraceni, saracenorum enim erat dominium
ciuitatis. hac autem ciuitas erat diuitijs multum plena. est enim posita
super fluuium qui vocatur don, qui intrat in mare. vnde est quasi portus:
et forum maximum habebant de illa ciuitate alij saraceni. et cum non
possent aliter deuincere, praciderunt fluuium, qui ciurrebat per ciutatem,
et illam cum rebus omnibus submerserunt. quo facto: postea intrauerunt
terram tortorum, qui similiter sunt pagani: quam deuincentes, iuerunt
contra russiam, et fecerunt magnam stragem in terra russia, ciuitates et
castra destruxerunt, et homines occiderunt: [sidenote: kiouia ciuitas.]
etiam kiouiam qua erat metropolis russia obsederunt: et cum diu
obsedissent, illam ceperunt, et occiderunt homines ciuitatis. inde
procedentes pugnando destruxerunt totam russiam. de russia autem et comania
processerunt duces pradicti, et pugnauerent contra hungaros et polonos. ex
quibus tartaris in polonia, et in hungaria plures interfecti fuerunt. et si
non fugissent, sed viriliter restitissent, hungari exiuissent tartari de
finibus suis: quia tunc habuerant timorem, quod omnes fugere attentabant.
sed bati vaginato gladio in faciem eis restitit, dicens: nolite fugere:
quia si fugitis nullus euadet: et si debemus mori, moriamur omnes: quia
futurum est, vt cyngis can pradixit, quod interfici debeamus: et si nunc
est tempus, sustineamus. et sic animati sunt et remanserunt, et hungariam
destruxerunt. [sidenote: morduanorum terra.] inde reuertentes iuerunt in
terram morduanorum, qui sunt pagani, et bello deuicerunt. [sidenote:
bulgaria magna.] inde procedentes contra bileros, id est bulgariam magnam,
et ipsam destruxerunt omnino. [sidenote: hungaria magna.] inde procedentes
ad aquilonem adhuc contra bascart, id est, hungariam magnam, et eos etiam
deuicerant. [sidenote: parossita.] inde egredientes iuerunt ad aquilonem,
et venerunt ad parossitas qui habent paruos stomachos et os paruulum, nec
manducant, sed decoquunt carnes: quibus decoctis ponunt se inter fumum et
ollam, et recipiunt fumum, et de hoc solo reficiuntur: sed etiam si aliquid
manducant, hoc valde modicum est. [sidenote: samogedi.] inde procedentes
venerunt ad samogedos. hij autem homines tantum de venationibus viuunt:
tabernacula et vestes habent tantummodo de bestiarum pellibus. [sidenote:
oceanus septentrionails. similes frobisheri hominibus.] inde vltra
procedentes venerunt ad quandam terram super oceanum, vbi inuenerunt quadam
monstra qua per omnia formam humanam habebant, sed pedes desinebant in
pedes bouinos, et faciem per omnia habebant vt canis: duo verba loquebantur
more humano et tertio latrabant vt canis: et sic per interualia temporum
latratum interponebant: tum ad naturam suam redibant: et sic intelligi
poterat quod dicebant: inde redierant in comaniam, et vsque nunc quidam ex
eis morantur ibidem. [sidenote: expeditio cyrpodanis.] cyrpodan vero eodem
tempore misit occoday can cum exercitu ad meridiem contra kergis, quos
etiam bello deuicit. hij autem homines sunt pagani, qui pilos in barba non
habent. quorum consuetudo est talis. cum pater moritur alicuius, pra dolore
quasi vnam corrigiam in signum lamenti ab aure vsque ad aurem de facie sua
leuant. [sidenote: armeni.] quibus deuictis, ad meridiem iuit contra
armenos. [sidenote: hij videntur sagittasse balistis.] sed cum per deserta
transiret, etiam quadam monstra effigiem humanam habentia inuenerunt: sed
non nisi vnum brachium cum manu, in medio pectoris, et vnum pedem habebant;
et duo sagittarunt cum vno arcu, et isti ita fortiter currebant, quod equi
eos inuestigare non poterant. currebant enim saltando super illum vnum
pedem, et cum essent fessi taliter eundo, ibant super manum et pedem,
remouendo se quasi rota; et sic cum essent fessi iterum currebant secundum
modum priorem: aliquos tamen occidebant ex eis. [sidenote: georgia.] inde
procedentes venerunt in armeniam, quam bello vicerunt, et partem georgia:
et alia pars venit ad mandatum eorum; et quadraginta millia yperperorum
singulis annis dederunt, et adhuc faciunt idem. [sidenote: terra soldani
deurum.] inde procedentes ad terram soldani deurum, qui erat satis magnus
et potens, cum eo pugnauerunt et deuicerunt. [sidenote: terra soldani
halapia.] inde procedentes vltra de bellando et vincendo vsque ad terram
soldani halapia et nunc terram illam impugnant, nec postea vsque in
hodiernum diem in terram suam fuerunt reuersi. alius exercitus iuit contra
terram calif de baldach, quam sibi etiam subdiderunt: et quadraginta
bisantia exceptis baldachinis et alijs muneribus omni die dant pro tributi:
et omni anno pro calif, vt ad eos veniat, nuncios mittunt: qui cum tributo
munera magna mittit, rogans vt eum supportent. ipse vero imperator munera
accipit et nihilominus vt veniat mittit pro eo.

qualiter tartari se habent in pralijs. cap. 6.

dicto de imperio, dicendum est hoc modo de bello. primo de ordinatione
acierum. secundo de armis. tertio de astutijs in congressione, quarto de
crudelitate quam faciunt in captiuos. quinto de oppugnatione castrorum et
ciuitatum. sexto de perfidia quam exercent cum hijs qui se reddunt eisdem.
de ordinatione acierum dicemus hoc modo. cyngis can ordinauit, vt decem
hominibus praponeretur vnus: et ille secundum nos appellatur decanus. decem
autem decanis praponeretur vnus, qui centenarius nuncupatur: decem vero
centenarijs praponeretur vnus qui millenarius nuncupatur decem millenarijs
praponeretur vnus, et ille numerus vocatur tenebre apud eos. cuncto vero
exercitui praponnuntur duo duces vel tres, ita tamen quod habeant respectum
ad vnum. cum autem omnes sunt in bello si de decem hominibus fugit vnus vel
duo, vel tres, vel etiam plures, omnes occiduntur. et vt breuiter dicam,
nisi communiter cedant, omnes qui fugiunt occiduntur. item si vnus vel duo
aut plures audacter ad pugnam accedunt, et decem alij non sequuntur etiam
occiduntur. item si vnus de decem vel plures capiuntur, et alij socij sui
non liberant eos, etiam occiduntur. duo arcus vel tres, vel vnum bonum ad
minus, et tres pharetras magnas plenas de sagittis et vnam securim, et
funes ad machinas trahendas habere debet vnusquisque. diuites autem habent
gladios acutos in fine, ex vna tantum parte incidentes, et aliquantulum
curuos: et habent equum armatum, crura etiam tecta. galeas et loricas
quidam habent de corio in hunc modum formatas. habent quasdam corrigias de
boue ad latitudinem vnius manus, et bituminant tres vel quatuor simul, et
ligant illos corrigiolis vel cordis. in corrigia superiori ponunt cordulas
in fine; in inferiori ponunt in medio, et sic faciunt vsque ad finem. vnde
quum se inclinant in inferiores, corrigia superiores ascendunt et sic
duplicantur super corpus, vel triplicantur. de coopertura equi faciunt
quinque partes: ex vna parte faciunt vnam, ex alia parte faciunt aliam,
quam partem ducunt a cauda vsque ad caput: qua ligantur ad sellam, et post
sellam in dorso et etiam in collo, super renes etiam partem aliam ponunt,
vbi dua partium ligatura iunguntur: in qua pecia faciunt vnum foramen, per
quod caudas exponunt: et ante pectus ponant etiam vnam: qua omnes
protenduntur vsque ad crurium iuncturas. et ante frontem laminam ferream
ponunt, qua ex vtraque parte colli partibus pradictis ligatur. lorica vero
etiam quatuor partes habet, vna pars protenditur a foemore vsque ad collum;
sed est facta secundum dispositionem humani corporis: quia ante pectus est
stricta; in rotundum obuoluitur circa corpus a brachijs inferius: super
humeros autem retro ad renes habent aliam peciam, qua protenditur a collo
vsque ad aliam peciam, qua reuoluitur circa corpus: super humeros autem
ista dua pecia anterior videlicet et posterior, ad duas laminas ferreas qua
sunt in vtroque humero fibulis connectuntur. et in vtroque brachio vnam
habent peciem, qua ab humero protenduntur vsque ad manus, qua etiam
inferius sunt apta. et in vtroque crure vnam habent peciam: qua pecia omnes
fibulis coniunguntur. galea autem superius est ferrea. sed illud quod
protegit in circuitu collum et gulam de corio fit. et omnes ista pecia de
corio sunt formata secundum modum superius annotatum. quidam autem omnia
qua superius diximus habent de ferro in hunc modum formata. vnam laminam
tenuem ad latitudinem vnius digiti faciunt, et ad longitudinem palma vnius.
et in hunc modum faciunt laminas multas: et in vnaquaque lamina octo
foramina paruula faciunt, et interius tres corrigias strictas et fortes
ponunt, et laminas vnam super aliam ponunt, quasi ascendendo per gradus: et
ligant laminas pradictas ad corrigias tenuibus corrigiolis, quas mittunt
per foramina superius annotata: et in superiori parte consuunt corrigiolam
vnam, vt lamina pradicta bene et firmiter cohareant sibi. et faciunt ex
laminis quasi corrigiam vnam, et postea ligant per pecias per omnia, sicut
superius dictum est. et ista faciunt tam ad equorum quam ad hominum
armaturas. et faciunt illa ita lucere, quod potest homo in eis faciem suam
videre. aliqui eoram lanceas habent: et in fine ferri lancea vnum habent
vncum, cum quo trahunt hominem de sella si possunt. longitudo saggitarum
est duorum pedum et vnius palma, et duorum digitorum. et quia diuersi sunt
pedes, mensurum pedum geometricam ponimus. duodecem grana hordei pollicis
transuersio est. sexdecem pollices transuersi faciunt vnum geometricum
pedem. ferramenta sagittarum sunt acutissima, et ex vtraque parte
incidentia quasi gladius biceps, et semper portant limas iuxta pharetram ad
acuendum sagittas. ferramenta pradicta caudam habent acutam ad longitudinem
vnius digiti, quam imponunt in lignum. scutum habent de viminibus vel de
virgulis factum. saggitas habent alias ad sagittandum aues bestias et
homines inermes ad trium digitorum latitudinem. sagittas alias habent
diuersimodas ad aues et bestias sagittandas. quum ad bellum procedere
volunt pracursores pramittunt, qui nihil secum portant prater filtra sua,
equos et arma. isti nihil rapiunt, domos non comburunt, bestias non
occidunt: sed tamen homines vulnerant et mortificant, et si non possunt
aliud mittunt in fugam; multo libentius tamen occidunt, quam fugant, post
istos sequitur exertitus, qui cuncta qua inuenit accipit, et homines etiam,
si inueniri possunt, accipiunt et occidunt. [sidenote: mos tranandi
flumina.] quum autem ad flumina perueniunt, hoc modo transeunt illa etiamsi
sunt magna. maiores vnum rotundum et leue corium habent, in quo in
summitate per circuitum crebras faciunt ansas, in quibus funem imponunt, et
stringunt ita quod in circuitu faciunt quendam ventrem, quem replent
vestibus, et alijs rebus, et fortissime comprimunt ad imuicem: post hoc in
medio ponunt sellas et alias res duriores: homines autem in medio sedent:
et ligant et caudam equi nauem hanc taliter praparatam, et vnum hominum qui
equum regat faciunt pariter cum equo ante natare: vel habent aliquando duos
remos, et cum illis remigant vltra aquam, et sic transeunt fluuium. equos
vero pellunt in aqua, et vnus homo iuxta vnum equum, quem regit, natat: et
alij equi illum sequuntur. et sic transeunt aquas et flumina magna. alij
vero pauperiores vnam bursam de corio bene consutam vnusquisque tenetur
habere: in qua bursa vel in quo sacco vestes et omnes res suas imponunt; et
in summitate saccum fortissime ligant, et suspendunt ad caudam equi, et
transeunt, vt suptadictum est. sciendum est, quod cum vident hostes tunc
vadunt ad eos, et vnusquisque iacit tres saggitas vel quatuor contra
aduersarios: et si vident quod eos superare non possunt, retro gradiuntur
ad suos: et hoc faciunt in fraudem, vt aduersarij eos sequantur ad loca vbi
insidias paruerunt: et si inimici eorum sequuntur ad pradictas insidias,
circumdant eos et sic vulnerant et occidunt. item si vident quod magnus
exercitus est contra eos, aliquando diuertunt ab eo per vnam dietam vel
duas, et aliam partem terra inuadunt et spoliant: et interficiunt homines,
et terra destruunt et deuastant. et si vident quod hoc etiam facere non
possunt, cedunt retro ad decem vel duo decem dietas: aliquando etiam
morantur in loco tuto, quousque aduersariorum exercitus separetur, et tunc
furtim veniunt, et depopulantur totam terram. in bellis etiam astutissimi
sunt: quia iam per quadraginta annos et amplius cum alijs gentibus
dimicarunt. cum autem volunt ad pugnam accedere, omnes acies ordinant sicut
deberent pugnare. duces siue principes exercitus bellum non intrant, sed
stant a longe contra inimicorum exercitum, et iuxta se habent pueros in
equis et mulieres et equos. et faciunt aliquando imagines hominum, et
ponunt super equos. hoc ideo faciunt, vt multitudo magna bellantium esse
credantur. contra faciem equorum vnam aciem captiuorum et aliarum gentium
qua sunt inter eos transmittunt: et forsitan aliqui tartari vadunt cum eis.
alias acies fortiorum hominum longe mittunt a dextras et a sinistris, vt
non videantur ab aduersarijs suis: et sic circumdant aduersarios et
colligunt in medium, et pugnare incipiunt ex omni parte. et cum sunt
aliquando pauci, putantur ab aduersarijs qui circumdati sunt, esse multi.
et maxime cum videant illos, qui sunt cum duce vel principe exercitus
pueros et mulieres et equos, et homines fictos, vt dictum est supra: quos
credunt esse pugnatores: et per hoc terrentur et confunduntur. et si forte
aduersarij bene pugnant, faciunt eis viam vt fugiant: et statim cum fugere
incipiunt, ab inuicem separati insequuntur eos, et plures tunc occidunt
fuga, quam mortificare possent in bello. sciendum tamen est, quod si aliud
possunt, non libenter congrediuntur, sed homines et equos sagittis
vulnerant et occidunt. munitiones in hunc modum expugnant. [sidenote:
qualiter munitiones obsident.] si est talis munitio ipsam circumdat, immo
aliquando ita sepiunt, vt nullus ingredi vel exire possit. expugnant
fortissime machinis et sagittis: et nec die nec nocte cessant a pralio, vt
illi qui sunt in munitionibus non quiescant. ipsi tartari quiescunt: quia
acies diuidunt et vna succedit alteri in pugnam vt non nunium fatigentur.
et si eam taliter habere non possunt gracum proijciunt ignem. imo solent
aliquando accipere aruinam hominum quos occidunt, et liquefactum proijciunt
super domos: et vbicunque venit ignis super pinguedinem illam, quasi
inextinguibiliter ardet. et si ita non praualent, et si ciuitas illa vel
castrum habeat flumen, obstruunt illud, vel faciunt alium alueum et
submergunt illam munitionem si possunt. si autem non possunt suffodiunt
illam, et sub terra armati in ipsam ingrediuntur. et cum iam intrauerunt,
vna pars ignem imponit vt comburatur: et alia pars cum illius munitionis
hominibus pugnat. si autem nec sic illam vincere possunt, castrum vel
munitionem suam faciunt contra illam, vt ab inimicorum iaculis non
grauentur, et contra illam multo tempore iacent: nisi forte exterius
adiutorium exercitus qui pugnat cum eis adhibeat, et vi remoueant ipsos.
[sidenote: punica fides.] sed cum iacent ante munitionem, blande eis
loquuntur, et multa promittunt, ad hoc vt se in eorum manus tradant: et si
illi se eis tradiderint, dicunt: exite, vt secundum morem nostrum vos
muneremus. et cum illi ad eos exeunt, quarunt qui sunt artifices inter eos,
et illos reseruant: alios autem, exceptis illis quos volunt habere pro
seruis cum securi occidunt. et si aliquibus alijs parcunt, vt dictum est,
nobilibus et honestis nunquam parcunt. et si forte aliquo casu contingente
reseruant aliquos nobiles; nec prece nec precio vltra de captiuitate
possunt exire. in bellis autem quoscunque capiunt occidunt, nisi forte
velint aliquos reseruare vt habeant eos pro seruis. occidendos autem
diuidunt per centenarios, vt cum bipenni interficiantur ab eis. ipsi vero
post hoc diuidunt captiuos, et vnicuique seruo ad interficiendum dant decem
aut plures vel pauciores, secundum quod maioribus placet.

de terris quas eorum dominio subiugarunt. cap. 7.

scripto quomodo pugnant, dicendum est de terris, quas eorum dominio
subiugarunt. de quo isto modo scribemus. primo dicemus quomodo faciunt cum
hominibus pacem. secundo de terrarum nominibus quas sibi subdiderunt.
tertio de tyrannide quam exercent in eis. quarto de terris qua viriliter
restiterunt. sciendum est quod cum nullis hominibus faciunt pacem, nisi
subdentur eis, quia, vt dictum est supra, cyngis can habent mandatum, vt
cunctas si possunt sibi subijciant nationes. et hac sunt illa qua petunt ab
eis, vt vadant cum eis in exercitu contra omnem hominem quando placet, et
vt dent decimam de omnibus tam de hominibus, quam de rebus. computant enim
decem, et vnum accipiunt. de puellis faciunt illud idem, quos in terram
eorum deducunt et tenent eos pro seruis: reliquos numerant et ordinant
secundum morem. sed quando plene habent dominium super eos, si aliquid
promiserunt eis nihil obseruant: sed quascunque possunt congrue occasiones
inueniunt contra eos. nam cum essemus in russia, missus fuit saracenorum ex
parte cuynthcan vt dicebatur et bati et prafectus ille a quolibet homine
qui habebat tres pueros vnum accipiebat: et quicunque viri non habebant
vxores, illos deducebant, et faciebant de mulieribus etiam illud idem qua
viros legitimos non habebant. pauperes etiam qui mendicando suum victum
quarebant similiter deportabunt. [sidenote: vrsi albi.] reliquos autem
secundum eorum consuetudinem numerauit, pracipiens vt vnusquisque tam
paruus quam magnus, et infans vnius diei, siue pauper siue diues esset,
tale tributum praberet: vt scilicet daret vnum pellem albi vrsi, et vnum
nigrum castorem, et vnum zabulum, et vnam nigram pellem cuiusdam animalis
quod in terra latibulum habet, cuius nomen nescio in latinum transferre,
sed teutonice dicitur illit [marginal note: vel illic.]: [sidenote:
dochon.] poloni autem et rutheni appellant illam dochon: et vnam nigram
pellem vulpinam. et quicunque ista non dat, inter tartaros debet duci, et
in eorum redigi seruitutem. mittunt etiam pro principibus terrarum, vt ad
eos veniant sine mora: et cum venerint, debitum honorem nullum recipiunt,
sed habentur vt alia viles persona: et oportet vt eis munera magna
prasentent, tam ducibus quam vxoribus eorum, et officialibus, millenarijs
et centenarijs. imo omnes generaliter, et ipsi etiam serui ab eis cum magna
importunitate munera quarunt: et non solum ab ipsis, sed etiam a nuncijs
eorum cum mittuntur. aliquibus etiam inueniunt occasiones vt eos occidant.
sicut de michaele et alijs actum est. aliquos vero alliciunt, quos
permittunt redire. aliquos etiam potionibus perimunt vel veneno. eorum enim
intentio est, vt ipsi soli dominentur in terra. idcirco quarunt occasiones
contra nobiles, vt eos occidant. ab illis vero quos redire permittunt
petunt eorum filios aut fratres, quos vlterius nunquam dimittunt. sicut
factum est de filio ieroslai, et de quodam duce alanorum, et alijs
plurimis. et si moritur pater vel frater siue hares, filium vel fratrem
nunquam dimittunt: immo illius principatum totaliter accipiunt sibi.
[sidenote: solangi. bascha, vox tartarica qua vtuntur turci.] sicut de
quodam solangorum vidimus esse factum, baschathos suos ponunt in terris
eorum quos redire permittunt, quibus oportet vt ad nutum tam duces quam
alij debeant obedire. et si homines alicuius ciuitatis vel terra non
faciunt quod volunt, isti baschathi imponunt eis, quod sunt tartaris
infideles: et sic ciuitatem illam vel terram destruunt et homines qui sunt
in ea occidunt, per manum validam tartarorum, qui ex mandato principis
illius cui obedit terra illa veniunt eis nescientibus, et subito irruunt
super eos: sicut nuper contigit cum in terra tartarorum essemus de quadam
ciuitate. quod ipsummet de ruthenis fecerunt in terra comanorum. et non
solum princeps tartarorum qui terram vsurpauit, sed prafectus ipsius, et
quicunque tartarus per ciuitatem illam siue terram transit quasi dominatur
eidem, et maxime qui maior est apud eos. in super aurum et argentum, et
alia qua volunt et quando libet ad imperatorem vadant tartarorum ad
placitandum. sicut nuper contigit de duobus filijs regis georgia. vnus enim
erat legitimus, et alter de adulterio natus, qui vocabatur dauid legitimus
autem melic vocabatur. filio adultera terra partem relinquebat pater. alius
vero, qui iunior erat, veniebat cum matre ad tartarorum imperatorem, pro eo
quod dauid pradictus ad ipsum iter arripuerat veniendi. mater alterius
scilicet melic regina georgia, per quam maritus tenebat regnum, quia per
foeminas illud regnum tenebatur, mortua fuit in via. illi autem cum
venerunt dederunt maxima munera: et maxime legitimus filius, qui repetebat
terram quam reliquerat pater filio suo dauid, cum non deberet habere, quia
adultera filius erat. ille vero respondit: licet sim filius concubina, peto
tamen vt fiat mihi iusticia secundum legem tartarorum qui nullam
differentiam faciunt inter filios legitima et ancilla: vnde fuit data
sententia contra filium legitimum, vt ille dauidi qui maior erat subesset,
et terram haberet quiete et pacifice, quam dederat ei pater: et sic donaria
qua dederat, et causam quam contra fratrem suum dauid habuerat, amisit. ab
illis etiam nationibus qua longe sunt ab eis, et coniuncta sunt alijs
nationibus quas aliquo modo timent, qua non sunt eis subiecta, tributum
accipiunt et quasi misercorditer agunt cum eis, vt non adducant exercitum
super eos, vel etiam vt alij non terreantur, se tradere eis. sicut factum
est de obesis siue georgianis, a quibus quinquaginta vel quadraginta
millia, vt dictum est, yperperorum siue bysantiorum accipiunt pro tributo:
alias ad hoc in pace esse permittunt. tamen, secundum quod intelleximus ab
eis, rebellare proponunt.

terrarum nomina quas vicerunt sunt hac. kytai, naymani, solangi, kara
kytai, siue nigri kytai, comania, tumat, vourat, caraniti, huyur, soboal,
merkiti, meniti, baryhryur, gosmit, saraceni, bisermini, turcomani, byleri
magna bulgaria, baschare, magna hungaria, kergis, colona, thorati,
buritabeth, parossiti, sassi, iacobiti, alani, siue assi, obesi siue
georgiani, nestoriani, armeni, cangiti, comani brutachi, qui sunt iudai,
mordui, torci, gazari, samogedi [sidenote: samogedi aquilonares.], perses,
thoas, india minor siue athiopia, yrchasi, rutheni, baldach, sarthi: alia
terra sunt plures, sed earum nomina ignoramus. vidimus etiam viros et
mulieres fere de omnibus terris supra nominatis. hac autem sunt nomina
terrarum qua eis viriliter restiterunt, nec sunt adhuc subdita eis, india
magna, mangia; [sidenote: mangia.] quadam pars alanorum, quadam pars
kytaorum, sayi. quandam enim ciuitatem sayorum pradictorum obsederunt et
debellare tentauerunt. at ipsi fecerunt machinas contra machinas eorum, et
tartarorum machinas omnes fregerunt, nec ciuitati appropinquare poterant ad
pugnam contra machinas et balistas. tandem vnam viam sub terra fecerunt, et
prosiluerunt in ciuitatem, et alij tentabant incendere ciuitatem, alij
pugnabant. homines autem ciuitatis vnam partem populi ad extinguendum ignem
posuerunt, et alia pars fortiter pugnabat cum hijs qui intrauerunt
ciuitatem, et multos occiderunt ex eis, et alios vulnerauerunt,
compellentes eos ad suos redire. at ipsi videntes quod nihil possent
facere, et multi homines morerentur, recesserunt ab eis. in terra
saracenorum et aliorum vbi sunt quasi inter eos domini, accipiunt omnes
artifices meliores, et in omnibus operibus suis ponunt. alij autem
artifices dant eis de opere suo tributum. segetes omnes condunt in horreis
dominorum: et vnicuique vnum pondus satis modicum dant in die: nihil aliud
nisi ter in septimana modicum quid de carnibus eis prebent. et illi hoc
tantum artificibus faciunt qui in ciuitatibus commorantur. item quando
dominis placet iuuenes omnes accipiunt, et post se cum omnibus famulis suis
ire cogunt: qui de catero certo sunt numero tartarorum; immo potius de
numero captiuorum: quia etsi inter ipsos sunt numerati, non tamen habentur
in reuerentia sicut tartari; sed habentur pro seruis, et ad omnia pericula
vt alij captiui mittuntur. ipsi enim in bello sunt primi: etiam si debet
palus vel aqua periculosa transiri, eos oportet primo vadum tentare. ipsos
est etiam necesse operari omnia qua sunt facienda. ipsi etiam si in aliquo
offendunt, vel si non obediunt ad nutum, vt asmi verberantur. et vt
breuiter dicam, modicum quid manducant, et etiam modicum bibunt, et pessime
induuntur; nisi forte aliquid possunt lucrari, nisi sunt aurifabri et alij
artifices boni. sed aliqui tam malos dominos habent, quod nihil eis
dimittunt, nec hadent tempus pra multitudine operum dominorum, vt sibi
aliquid operentur, nisi furentur sibi tempus, quando forsitan debent
quiescere vel dormire. et hoc si vxores vel propriam stationem permittuntur
habere. alij autem qui tenentur in domo pro seruis omni miseria sunt
repleti. vidi enim eos ire in bracis sapissime, et toto corpore nudos in
maximo solis ardore. et in hyeme patiuntur maximum frigus. vidimus etiam
aliquos pedicas et digitos manuuni de magno frigore perdidisse. audiuimus
etiam alios esse mortuos, vel etiam de magno algore quasi in omnibus
membris inutiles esse, factos.


quomodo bello occurratur tartaris. cap. 8.

dicto de terris, qua obediunt eis, supponendum est quomodo bello occurratur
eisdem. quod videtur nobis hoc modo dicendum. primo scribendum est quid
intendunt. secundo de armis et ordinatione acierum. tertio quomodo
occurratur astutijs eorum in congressione. quarto de munitione castrorum et
ciuitatum. quinto quid faciendum sit de captiuis eorum. intentio tartarorum
est subijcere sibi totum mundum si possunt. et de hoc cyngischan habent
mandatum, sicut superius dictum est. idcirco eorum imperator sic in literis
suis scribit: "dei fortitudo, omnium imperator." et in superscriptione
sigilli sui hoc habet: "dominus in coelo, et cuynch chan super terram. dei
fortitudo, omnium hominum imperatoris sigillum." et ideo cum nullis
hominibus faciunt pacem, vt dictum est, nisi forte se in eorum manibus
tradunt. et quia excepta christianitate nulla est terra in orbe quam
timent, idcirco se ad pugnam prapararunt contra nos. vnde nouerint vniuersi
quod nobis existentibus in terra eorum in solenni curia, qua iam ex
pluribus annis indicta erat, fuimus, vbi elegerunt cuynch imperatorem in
presentia nostra, qui in lingua eorum dicitur chan. qui cuynch chan
pradictus erexit cum omnibus principibus vexillum contra ecclesiam dei et
romanum imperium, et contra omnia regna christianorum et populos
occidentis, nisi forsan facerent ea, qua mandat domino papa, et potentibus
ac omnibus christianorum populis occidentis: quod nulla ratione faciendum
est: tum, propter nimiam seruitutem et intolerabilem, qua est hactenus
inaudita, quam vidimus oculis nostris, in quam redigunt omnes gentes sibi
subiectas: tum propterea quod nulla in eis est fides: nec potest aliqua
gens confidere in verbis eorum: quia quicquid promittunt non obseruant,
quando vident sibi tempora fauere: et subdoli sunt in omnibus factis et
promissis eorum. intendunt etiam delere omnes principes, omnes nobiles,
omnes milites de terra, vt superius dictum est: sed hoc faciunt subdole et
artificiosem subditos suos. tum etiam quia indignum est quod christiani
subdantur eisdem, propter abominationes eorum, et quia in nihilum redigitur
cultus dei, et anima pereunt, et corpora vltra quam credi possit
multitudine affliguntur. in primo quidem sunt blandi, sed postea vt scorpio
cruciant et affligunt. tum quia pauciores sunt numero, et corpore
debiliores quam populi christiani. in pradicta autem curia sunt bellatores
et principes et exercitus assignati. de decem hominibus mittuntur tres cum
familijs eorum, de omni terra potestatis eorum. vnius exercitus debet
intrare per hungariam: secundus per poloniam. veniunt autem pugnaturi
continue octodecem annis. tempus est etiam eis assignatum. in martio an.
dom. 1247, si de terra sua mouebunt. venient autem in tribus vel in quatuor
[marginal note: forte mensibus.] annis vsque ad comaniam. de comania autem
insultum facient in terras superius annotatas. hac omnia firma sunt et
vera, nisi dominus aliquod impedimentum pro sua gratia faciat eis. sicut
fecit quando venerunt in hungariam et poloniam. debebant enim procedere
tunc pro certo triginta annis. sed interfectus fuit tunc imperator eoram
veneno: et propter hoc quieuerunt a prelijs vsque nunc. sed modo, quia
positus est imperator de nouo, iterum se de nouo ad pugnam incipiunt
praparare. [sidenote: tartari proponunt inuadere liuoniam at prussiam.]
adhoc sciendum est, quod imperator dixit ore suo, quod vellet mittere
exercitum in liuoniam et prussiam. et quoniam omnem terram volunt delere
vel in seruitutem redigere, qua seruitus est intolerabilis nostra genti, et
superius dictum est: occurrendum est igitur eis in bello. sed si vna
prouincia non vult alteri opem ferre, terra illa delebitur contra quam
pugnant, et cum illis hominibus quos capiunt pugnabunt contra aliam terram;
et in acie erunt primi. si male pugnant occidentur ab eis: si autem bene,
ipsos cum promissis adulationibus tenent: et etiam vt ab ipsis non fugiant
promittunt eis quod facient eos dominos magnos et post hoc quando securi
esse possunt de ipsis, vt non redeant, faciunt eos infoelicissimos seruos.
ac de mulieribus quas volunt in concubinas tenere pro seruitijs faciunt
illud idem. et ita cum hominibus deuicta prouincia destruunt aliam terram.
nec est aliqua prouincia qua per se possit resistere eis: quia de omni
terra potestatis eorum, vt dictum est homines congregint ad bellum. vnde si
christiani seipsos et suam terram et christanitatem volunt seruare, oportet
quod in vnium conueniant reges, principes et barones, et terrarum rectores,
et mittant de communi consilio homines contra eos ad pugnam, antequam ipsi
incipiunt in terras diffundi. quoniam postquam incipiunt spargi per terras,
vndique homines quarunt, et nullus congrue auxilium alteri potest prabere:
quoniam ipsi cateruatim vndique quarunt homines et occidunt. et si claudunt
se in castris, ponunt tria millia vel quatuor millia hominum contra castrum
vel ciuitatem, qui obsideant eam; et ipsi nihilominus diffunduntur per
terras homines occidentes. quicunque autem volunt pugnare cum eis, hac arma
debent habere. arcus bonos et fortes, et balistas quas multum timent, et
sagittas sufficientes: et bonum dolabrum de bono ferro, et scutum cum longo
manubrio. [sidenote: temperamentum ferri.] ferramenta sagittarum de arcu
vel de balista debent, vt tartari, quando sunt calida, temperari in aqua
cum sale mixta, vt fortia sint ad penetrandum arma eorum. gladios et etiam
lanceas cum vnco, qui valeant ad trahendum eos de sellis: quia de eis
facillime cadunt; ac cultellos ac loricas duplicatas; quia illos eorum
sagitta non penetrant; et galeam et arma alia ad protegendum corpus et
equum ab armis et sagittis eorum. et si aliqui non sunt ita bene armati, vt
dixit; debent ire post alios vt faciunt tartari: et trahere contra eos de
armis et sagittis. nec debent parcere pecunia, quoniam comparent arma, vt
possint animas et corpora, libertatem et res alias conseruare. acies debent
ordinari, vt ipsi, per millenarios, centenarios, et decanos et duces
exercitus: qui duces nequaquam debent pralium intrare, sicut nec duces
eorum, sed debent exercitus videre et ordinare: legemque debent ponere vt
simul incedant ad bellum, siue alias, sicut sunt ordinati. et quicunque
relinquit alium siue ad bellum procedentem, siue pugnantem, vel quicunque
fugerit, nisi omnes communiter cedant, grauissime puniatur: quia tunc pars
bellantium sequitur fugientes, et sagittis eorum occidunt, et pars cum hijs
qui remanent pugnant, et sic confunduntur et occiduntur remanentes et
fugientes. similiter quicunque conuersus fuerit ad pradam tollendam,
antequam omnino sit exercitus contrariorum deuictus, maxima poena
mulctetur. talis enim apud tartaros sine vlla miseratione occiditur. locus
ad praliandum est eligendus, si fieri potest vt campus sit planus, et
possint vndique videre: et si possunt habeant syluam magnam a tergo vel a
latere. ita tamen quod non possunt intrare inter ipsos et syluam: nec
debent simul omnes conuenire in vnum, sed facere acies multas, et diuersas
ab inuicem nec tamen multum distantes. et contra illos qui post veniunt
debent vnam aciem mittere qui eis occurrat. et si tartari simulant fugam,
non multum vadant post eos, nisi forte quantum possunt videre, ne forte
ipsos ad paratas insidias trahant, sicut facere solent: et alia sit parata
ad muandum aciem illam, si fuerit opportunum. [sidenote: speculatores.]
insuper habeant speculatores ex omni parte, vt videant quando veniant alia
acies tartarorum retro, a dextris et a sinistris et semper debent mittere
aciem contra aciem qua eis occurrat. ipsi enim semper nituntur concludere
aduersarios eorum in medio, vnde magnam cautelam debent habere ne hoc
facere possint, quia sic exercitus facillime debellatur. omnes acies hoc
debent cauere, ne diu currant post eos, propter insidias quas solent
praparare: plus enim fraudulentia quam fortitudine pugnant. duces exercitus
semper debent esse parati ad mittendum adiutorium, si necesse est, illis
qui sunt in pugna, et propter hoc etiam debent vitare nimium cursum post
eos: ne forte fatigentur equi eorum; quoniam nostri multitudinem equorum
non habent. sed tartari illum quem equitant vna die, illum non ascendunt in
tribus vel in quatuor diebus post hoc. vnde non curant si fatigentur equi
eorum propter multitudinem quam habent. et si tartari cedunt, non tamen
nostri debent recedere, vel ab inuicem separari: quia simulando hoc
faciunt, vt exercitus diuidatur, et post hoc terram libere ingrediantur, et
eam destruant. debent etiam cauere vt non faciant nimias expensas, vt
solent; ne propter penuriam redire compellantur, et dent tartaris viam, vt
ipsos et alios occidant et destruant omnem terram; et propter eorum
superfluitatem nomen domini blasphemetur. et hoc debent facere diligenter
vt si contingat aliquos pugnatores recedere, quod alij loco eorum
succedant. duces etiam nostri debent die nocteque facere exercitum
custodiri, ne repente et subito irruant super ipsos quia tartari vt
damones, multas excogitant iniquitates et artes nocendi: immo tam de die
quam de nocte semper debent esse parati: sed nec spoliati debent iacere nec
deliciose ad mensam sedere, ne imparati inueniantur, quia tartari semper
vigilant, vt possint nocere. homines vero tera qui tartaros expectant, vel
super se timent venire, occultas foueas debent habere, in quibus sagittas,
et alia debent reponere, propter duo: vt videlicet tartari non possint ea
habere; et si propitius fuerit eis deus, valeant ea postea inuenire; eis
fugientibus de terra, debent foenum et stramina comburere, vt equi
tartarorum ad comedendum minus inueniant. ciuitates autem et castra si
volunt munire, videant prius qualia sint in situ. situs enim talis debet
esse in castris, quod machinis et sagittis expugnari non possit: et aquam
habeant sufficientem et lignum, et si fieri potest, quod introitus et
exitus eis tolli non possit: et quod habeant homines sufficientes qui
possint vicissim pugnare. et debent vigilare diligenter ne aliqua astutia
possint castrum furari. expensas ad multos annos debent habere
sufficientes: custodiant tamen diligenter illas, et in mensura manducent,
quia nesciunt quanto tempore eos in castris oportet esse inclusos. quum
enim incipiunt, tunc multis annis obsident vnum castrum. [sidenote: obsidio
12 annorum.] sic fit hodierna die in terra alanorum de quodam monte, quem,
vt credo, tam obsederunt per duodecem annos; qui viriliter restiterunt, et
multos tartaros et nobiles occiderunt. alia autem castra et ciuitates, qua
talem situm non habent debent fortiter vallari foueis profundis munitis, et
muris bene praparatis; et arcus et sagittas sufficientes: et lapides ac
fundas debent habere. et debent diligenter cauere, quod non permittant
tartaros ponere machinas suas; et suis machinis debent eos repellere. et si
forte aliquo ingenio vel arte erigunt lartari machinas suas, debent eas
destruere machinis suis si possunt. balistis etiam, fundis et machinis
debent resistere ne ciuitati appropinquent. alias etiam debent esse parati,
vt superius dictum est. de castris et ciuitatibus, qua sunt in fluminibus
posita, diligenter debent videre ne possint submergi. sed ad hoc sciendum
est, quod tartari plus diligunt, quod homines claudant se in ciuitatibus,
quam quod pugnent cum eis in campo. dicunt enim eos esse suos por cellos in
hara conclusos. vnde ponunt eis custodes, vt supradictum est. si autem
aliqui tartari de equis suis in bello proijciuntur, statim sunt capiendi:
quia cum sunt in terra fortiter sagitant, et equos et homines vulnerant et
occidunt. et si seruantur tales, potest esse, quod habeatur pro eis pax
perpetua, aut pecunia magna redimantur: quoniam se adinuicem satis
diligunt. sed quomodo tartari cognoscantur, superius dictum est vbi forma
eorum fuit expressa. tamen quando capiuntur, si debent seruari, ne fugiant
diligens est custodia adhibenda. sunt etiam alia multa gentes cum eis, qua
per formam superius annotatam possunt ab ipsis cognosci. est etiam hoc
sciendum, quod multi in exercitu eorum sunt, qui si viderent tempus, et
haberent fiduciam, quod nostri non occiderent eos, ex omni parte exercitus,
sicut ipsimet nobis dixerunt, pugnarent cum eis, et plura mala facerent
ipsis, quam alij, qui sunt eorum aduersarij manifesti.

       *       *       *       *       *

the long and wonderful voyage of frier iohn de plano carpini, sent
  ambassadour by pope innocentius the iiii. an. do. 1246. to the great
  can of tartaria; wherin he passed through bohemia, polonia, russia,
  and so to the citie of kiow vpon boristhenes, and from thence rode
  continually post for the space of sixe moneths through comania, ouer
  the mighty and famous riuers of tanais, volga, and iaic, and through
  the countries of the people called kangitta, bisermini, kara-kitay,
  naimani, and so to the natiue countrie of the mongals or tartars,
  situate in the extreme northeasterne partes of all asia: and thence
  backe againe the same way to russia, and polonia, and so to rome;
  spending in the whole voyage among the sayd tartars one whole yeere
  and aboue foure moneths. taken out of the 32. booke of vincentius
  beluacensis his speculum historiale.

libri xxxii.

de prima missione fratrum pradicatorum et minorum ad tartaros. cap. 2.

[sidenote: ascelinus.] hoc etiam tempore misit innocentius iiii. papa fr.
ascelinum de ordine pradicatorum cum tribus alijs fratribus, auctoritate,
qua fungebantur, de diuersis ordinis sui conuentibus sibi associatis, cum
literis apostolicis ad exercitum tartarorum, in quibus hortabatur eos, vt
ab hominum strage desisterent, et fidei veritatem reciperent. [marginal
note: vide mechouium lib. i cap. 5.] [sidenote: simon sanquintinianus.] et
ego quidem ab vno fratrum pradicatorum, videlicet a fr. simone de s.
quintino, iam ib illo itinere regresso, gesta tartarorum accepi, illa
duntaxat, qua superius per diuersa loca iuxta congruentiam temporum huic
operi inserui. [sidenote: ioannes de plano carpini.] siquidem et eo tempore
quidam frater ordinis minorum, videlicet fr. iohannes de plano carpini, cum
quibusdam alijs missus fuit ad tartaros, qui etiam, vt ipse testatur, per
annum et quatuor menses et amplius cum eis mansit, et inter eos ambulauit.
[sidenote: benedictus polonus.] a summo namque pontifice mandatum, vt
omnia, qua apud eos erant, diligenter scrutaretur, acceperat, tam ipse,
quam fr. bendictus polonus eiusdem ordinis, qui sua tribulationis particeps
et socius erat. [sidenote: libellus historialis iohannis de plano carpini.]
et hic ergo fr ioannes de his, qua apud tartaros vel oculis proprijs vidit,
vel a christianis fide dignis, qui inter illos captiui erant, audiunt,
libellum historialem conscripsit qui et ipse ad manus nostras peruenit. de
quo etiam hic quasi per epilogum inserere libet aliqua, videlicet ad
supplementum eorum, qua desunt in pradicta fr simoms historia.


the same in english.

the voyage of iohannes de plano carpini vnto the northeast parts of
  the world in the yeere of our lord, 1246.

of the first sending of certaine friers pradicants and minorites vnto the
  tartars, taken out of the 32 booke of vincentius beluacensis [footnote:
  vincentius belvacensis, or of beauvais who died in 1264 was a favourite
  of louis ix of france, who supplied him with whatever books he required.
  he thus obtained plenty of material for his _speculum majus_ (printed at
  douay in 1624, 10 vols. in 4, folio), a badly chosen and ill-arranged
  collection of extracts of all kinds. it is in four parts the first called
  _speculum naturale_ the second, _speculum doctrinale_, the third
  _speculum morale_ and the fourth _speculum historiale_.] his speculum
  historiale beginning at the second chapter.

[sidenote: ascellinus.] about this time also, pope innocentius the
fourth sent frier ascelline being one of the order of the pradicants,
together with three other friers (of the same authoritie whereunto
they were called) consorted with him out of diuers conuents of their
order, with letters apostolicall vnto the tartars campe: wherein hee
exhorted them to giue ouer their bloudie slaughter of mankinde, and to
receiue the christian faith. [sidenote: simon quintinianus.] and i in
verie deede, receuied the relations concerning the deedes of the
tartars onelie, (which, according to the congruence of times, i haue
aboue inserted into this my woorke) from a frier minorite called simon
de sanct. quintin who lately returned from the same voyage. [sidenote:
iohn de plano carpini.] and at that verie time also, there was a
certaine other frier minorite, namely frier iohn de plano carpini,
sent with certaine associates vnto the tartars, who likewise (as
himselfe witnesseth) abode and conuersed with them a yeere and three
moneths at the least. [sidenote: benedictus polonus.] for both he and
one frier benedict a poloman being of the same order, and a partaker
of all his miserie and tribulation, receiued straight commaundement
from the pope that both of them shoulde diligently searche out all
things that concerned the state of the tartars. and therefore this
frier iohn hath written a litle historie (which is come to our hands)
of such things, as with his owne eyes hee sawe among the tartars, or
which he heard from diuers christians worthy of credit, remaining
there in captiuitie. out of which historie i thought good by way of
conclusion, to insert somewhat for the supply of those things which
are wanting in the said frier simon.


de situ et qualitate terra tartarorum. cap. 3.

iohannes de plano carpini.

[sidenote: tartaria descriptio.] est in partibus orientis terra, qua
mongal siue tartaria dicitur, in ea scilicet parte sita, in qua oriens
aquiloni coniungi creditur. ab oriente quidem habet terram kythaorum
et etiam salangorum, a meredie vero terram sarracenorum. inter
orientem [marginal note: vel occidentem.] et meridiem terram huynorum,
et ab occidente prouinciam naymanorum, ab aquilone vero circundatur
oceano. in parte aliqua nimium est montuosa, et in aliqua campestris,
sed tota fere admixta glarea plurimum arenosa, nec est in centesima
parte fructuosa. nec enim potest fructum portare, nisi aquis
fluuialibus irrigetur, qua ibi sunt rarissima. vnde nec villa nec
aliqua ciuitates ibidem reperiuntur, excepta vna, qua cracurim
appellatur, et satis bona esse dicitur. [sidenote: syra orda.] nos
quidem illam non vidimus, sed ad dimidiam dietam prope fuimus, cum
apud syram ordam, qua curia maior imperatoris, eorum est, essemus.
licet autem alias infructifera sit illa terra, tamen alendis pecoribus
est apta. in aliqua eius parte sunt aliqua sylua modica, alia vero
sine lignis est omnino. [sidenote: aeris intemperies.] itaque tam
imperator quam principes, et omnes alij sedent, et cibaria sua
decoquunt ad focum, de boum et equorum stercoribus factum. ipse quoque
aer inordinatus est ibidem mirabiliter. in media siquidem astate ibi
tonitrua magna et fulgura fiunt, ex quibus plurimi occiduntur homines,
et eodem quoque tempore cadunt ibidem maxima niues. [sidenote: orda
quid.] sunt et ibi ventorum frigidissimorum tam maxima tempestates,
quod aliquando vix possunt equitare homines. vnde cum ante ordam
essemus (sic enim apud eos stationes imperatoris et principum
appellantur) pra venti magnitudine in terra prostrati iacebamus, et
videre propter pulueris magnitudinem minime poteramus. nunquam ibi
pluit in hyeme, sed frequenter in astate, et tam modicum, vt vix
posset aliquando puluerem et radicem graminum madefacere. ibi quoque
maxima grando cadit sape. vnde cum imperator electus in sede regni
debuit poni, nobis in curia tunc existentibus, tanta cecidit grando,
quod ex subita resolutione plusquam clx. homines in eadem curia
fuerunt submersi. res etiam et habitacula plura fuerunt deducta. ibi
etiam est in astate subito calor magnus, et repente maximum frigus.


the same in english.

of the situation and qualitie of the tartars land, by iohannes de
  plano carpini. chap. 3.

[sidenote: a description of tartaria.] there is towards the east a
land which is called mongal or tartaria, lying in that parte of the
worlde which is thought to be most north easterly. on the east part it
hath the countrey of kythay [footnote: or cathay.] and of the people
called solangi: on the south part the countrey of the saracens: on the
south east the land of the huini: and on the west the prouince of
naimani: [sidenote: the north ocean.] but on the north side it is
inuironed with the ocean sea. in some part thereof it is full of
mountaines, and in other places plaine and smoothe grounde, but euerie
where sandie and barren, neither is the hundreth part thereof
fruitefull. for it cannot beare fruite vnlesse it be moistened with
riuer waters, which bee verie rare in that countrey. whereupon they
haue neither villages, nor cities among them, except one which is
called cracurim, and is said to be a proper towne. [sidenote: syra
orda.] we our selues sawe not this towne, but were almost within halfe
a dayes iourney thereof, when we remained at syra orda, which is the
great court of their emperour. and albeit the foresaid lande is
otherwise vnfruitfull, yet it is very commodious for the bringing vp
of cattell. in certaine places thereof are some small store of trees
growing, but otherwise it is altogether destitute of woods. therefore
the emperour, and his noble men and all other warme themselues, and
dresse their meate with fires made of the doung of oxen, and horses.
[sidenote: the intemperature of the aire.] the ayre also in that
countrey is verie intemperate. for in the midst of sommer there be
great thunders and lightnings, by the which many men are slaine, and
at the same time there falleth great abundance of snowe. there bee
also such mightie tempestes of colde windes, that sometimes men are
not able to sitte on horsebacke. [sidenote: what orda signifieth.]
whereupon, being neere vnto the orda (for by this name they call the
habitations of their emperours and noble men) in regarde of the great
winde we were constrained to lye groueling on the earth, and could not
see by reason of the dust. there is neuer any raine in winter, but
onely in sommer, albeit in so little quantitie, that sometimes it
scarcely sufficeth to allay the dust, or to moysten the rootes of the
grasse. there is often times great store of haile also. insomuch that
when the emperour elect was to be placed in his emperiall throne (my
selfe being then present) there fell such abundance of haile, that,
vpon the sudden melting thereof, more than 160 persons were drowned in
the same place: there were manie tentes and other thinges also carried
away. likewise, in the sommer season there is on the sudden extreame
heate, and suddenly againe intolerable colde.


de forma et habitu et victu eorum. cap. 4.

[sidenote: tartarorum species.] mongalorum autem siue tartarorum forma ab
omnibus alijs hominibus est remota. inter oculos enim, et inter genas, lati
sunt plus cateris, gena quoque satis prominent a maxillis. nasum habent
planum et modicum, oculos etiam paruos, et palpebras vsque ad supercilia
eleuatas, ac super verticem in modum clericorum coronas. [sidenote:
tonsura.] ex vtraque parte frontis tondendo, plusquam in medio crines
longos faciunt, reliquos autem sicut mulieres crescere permittunt. de
quibus duas cordas faciunt, et vnamquamque post aurem ligant. pedes quoque
modicos habent. [sidenote: habitus.] vestes tam virorum quam mulierum vno
modo formata sunt. pallijs vel cappis vel caputus non vtuntur. tunicas vero
miro modo formatas portant de buccaramo, vel purpurato, vel baldaquino.
pellicium habet pilos exterius, sed apertum est a posterioribus. habet
tamen caudulam vnam vsque ad genua retro. [sidenote: vestes retro caudata.]
vestes suas non lauant, nec lauari permittunt, et maxime a tempore, quo
tonitrua incipiunt vsquequo desinat illud tempus. [sidenote: tabernacula.]
stationes habent rotundas in modum tentorij de virgulis et baculis
subtilibus praparatas. supra vero in medio rotundam habent fenestram, vnde
ingrediatur lumen, et fumus exire possit: quia semper in medio faciunt
ignem: parietes autem et tecta filtro sunt operta ostia quoque de filtro
sunt facta harum quadam subito soluuntur, et reparantur, et super summarios
deferuntur: quadam vero dissolui non possunt sed in curribus portantur. et
quocunque siue ad bellum siue alias vadunt, semper illas secum deferunt.
[sidenote: opes in pecore.] in animalibus valde diuites sunt, vt in camelis
et bobus capris et ouibus. iumenta et equos habent in tanta multitudine
quantam non credimus totum mundi residuum habere. porcos autem et alias
bestias non habent. imperator ac duces atque alij magnates in auro et
argento ac serico et gemmis abundant. cibi eorum sunt omnia, qua mandi
possunt. [sidenote: victus.] vidimus eos etiam manducare pediculos. lac
bibunt animalium, et in maxima quantitate, si habent, iumentinum. porro in
hyeme, quia nisi diuites sint, lac iumentinum non habent, millium cum aqua
decoquunt, quod tam tenue faciunt, vt illud bibere valeant. vnde quilibet
eorum scyphum bibit vnum vel duos in mane, et quandoque nihil amplius
manducant in die. in sero autem vnicuique datur de carnibus modicum, et
bibunt ex eis brodium. porro in astate quando satis habent de lacte
iumentino carnes comedunt raro, nisi forte donentur eisdem, aut venatione
bestiam aliquam ceperint vel auem.


the same in english.

of their forme, habite, and manner of liuing. chap. 4.

the mongols or tartars, in outward shape, are vnlike, to all other people.
[sidenote: the shape of the tartars.] for they are broader betweene the
eyes and the balles of their cheekes, then men of other nations bee. they
haue flat and small noses, litle eyes and eye liddes standing streight
vpright, they are shauen on the crownes like priests. they weare their
haire somewhat longer about their eares, then vpon their foreheads: but
behinde they let it growe long like womans haire, whereof they braide two
lockes binding eche of them behind either eare. they haue short feet also.
[sidenote: their habite.] the garments, as well of their men, as of their
women are all of one fashion. they vse neither cloakes, hattes, nor cappes.
but they weare iackets framed after a strange manner, of buckeram, skarlet,
or baldakines. [sidenote: like vnto frobishers men.] their shoubes or
gownes are hayrie on the outside, and open behinde, with tailes hanging
downe to their hammes. they vse not to washe their garments, neither will
in any wise suffer them to bee washed, especially in the time of thunder.
[sidenote: their tabernacles.] their habitations bee rounde and cunningly
made with wickers and staues in manner of a tent. but in the middest of the
toppes thereof, they haue a window open to conuey the light in and the
smoake out. for their fire is alwayes in the middest. their walles bee
couered with felt. their doores are made of felte also. some of these
tabernacles may quickely be taken asunder, and set together againe, and are
caried vpon beastes backes. other some cannot be taken insunder, but are
stowed vpon carts. and whithersoeuer they goe, be it either to warre, or to
any other place, they transport their tabernacles with them. [sidenote:
their cattell.] they are very rich in cattel, as in camels, oxen, sheep,
and goats. and i thinke they haue more horses and mares then all the world
besides. but they haue no swine nor other beasts. their emperors, dukes,
and other of their nobles doe abound with silk, gold, siluer, and precious
stones. [sidenote: their victuals.] their victuals are al things that may
be eaten: for we saw some of them eat lice. they drinke milke in great
quantitie, but especially mares milke, if they haue it: they seeth mill
also in water, making it so thinne, that they may drinke thereof. euery one
of them drinkes off a cup full or two in a morning, and sometime they eate
nought else all the day long. but in the euening each man hath a little
flesh, giuen him to eate, and they drinke the broath thereof. howbeit in
summer time; when they haue mares milk enough, they seldome eate flesh,
vnles perhaps it be giuen them, or they take some beast or bird in hunting.


de moribus eorum bonis et malis. cap. 5.

habent autem mores quosdam quidem commendabiles, et quosdam detestabiles.
[sidenote: [greek: peitharchia].] magis quippe sunt obedientes dominis
suis, quam aliqui qui in mundo sint homines, siue religiosi siue seculares.
nam eos maxime reuerentur, nec illis de facili mentiuntur verbis factisue:
raro vel nunquam ad inuicem contendunt, bellaque vel rixa, vulnera vel
homicidia nunquam inter eos contingunt. [sidenote: abstinentia.] pradones
etiam ac fures rerum magnarum ibi nequaquam inueniuntur, ideoque stationes
et currus eorum, vbi thesauros habent, seris aut vectibus non firmantur. si
aliqua bestia perdita fuerit, quicunque inuenit eam vel dimittit, vel ad
illos, qui ad hoc positi sum, eam ducit. [sidenote: comitas. temperantia.]
apud quos ille, cuius est bestia, illam requirit, et absque vlla
difficultate recipit. vnus alium satis honorat, et familiaritatem ac
cibaria, quamuis apud eos sint pauca, liberaliter satis communicat. satis
etiam sunt sufferentes, nec cum ieiunauerint vno die, vel duobus, omnino
sine cibo, videntur impatientes, sed cantant et ludunt, ac si bene
comedissent. in equitando multum sustinent frigus, calorem quoque nimium
patiuntur. inter eos quasi nulla placita sunt, et quamuis multum
inebrientur, tamen in ebrietate sua nunquam contendunt. nullus alium
spernit, sed iuuat et promouet, quantum congrue potest. [sidenote:
castitas.] casta sunt eorum mulieres, nec aliquid inter eos auditur de
ipsarum impudicitia. quadam tamen turpia satis habent et impudica.
[sidenote: insolentia aduersus exteros.] porro erga cateros homines ijdem
tartari superbissimi sunt, omnesque nobiles et ignobiles quasi pro nihilo
reputantes despiciunt. vnde vidimus in curia imperatoris magnum russia
ducem, et filuim regis georgianorum, ac soldanos multos et magnos nullum
honorem debitum recipere apud eos. [sidenote: iracundia.] quinetiam tartari
eisdem assignati, quantumcunque viles essent illos antecedebant, semperque
primum locum et summum tenebant, imo etiam sape oportebat illos post eorum
posteriora sedere. praterea iracundi sunt, et indignantis natura multum
erga cateros homines, et vltra modum erga eosdem mendaces. in principio
quidem blandi sunt, sed postmodum vt scorpiones pungunt. [sidenote:
fraudulentia.] subdoli enim et fraudulenti sunt, et omnes homines si
possunt astutia circumueniunt. [sidenote: sordes. temulentia.] quicquid
mali volunt eis facere, miro modo occultant, vt sibi non possint prouidere,
vel contra eorum astutias remedium inuenire. immundi quoque sunt in cibo et
potu sumendis, et in cateris factis suis. ebrietas apud illos est
honorabilis: cumque multum aliquis biberit, ibidemque reijcit, non ideo
cessat, quin iterim bibat. [sidenote: [greek: dorodoxia.]] ad petendum
maximi sunt exactores, tenacissimi retentores, parcissimi donatores.
aliorum hominum occisio apud illos est pro nihilo.


the same in english.

of their manners both good and bad. chap. 5.

[sidenote: their obedience.] their manners are partly prayse-worthie, and
partly detestable: for they are more obedient vnto their lords and masters,
then any other either clergie or laie-people in the whole world. for they
doe highly reuerence them, and will deceiue them, neither in wordes nor
deedes. they seldom or neuer fall out among themselues, and, as for
fightings or brawlings, wounds or manslaughters, they neuer happen among
them. [sidenote: their abstinence] there are neither theeues nor robbers of
great riches to be found, and therefore the tabernacles and cartes of them
that haue any treasures are not strengthened with lockes or barres. if any
beast goe astray, the finder thereof either lets it goe, or driueth it to
them that are put in office for the same purpose, at whose handes the owner
of the said beast demaundeth it, and without any difficultie receiueth it
againe. [sidenote: their courtesie.] one of them honoureth another
exceedingly, and bestoweth banquets very familiarly and liberally,
notwithstanding that good victuals are daintie and scarce among them. they
are also very hardie, and when they haue fasted a day or two without any
maner of sustenance, they sing and are merry as if they had eaten their
bellies full. in riding, they endure much cold and extreme heat. there be,
in a maner, no contentions among them, and although they vse commonly to be
drunken, yet doe they not quarrell in their drunkennes. noe one of them
despiseth another but helpeth and furthereth him, as much as conueniently
he can. [sidenote: their chastity.] their women are chaste, neither is
there so much as a word vttered concerning their dishonestie. some of them
will notwithstanding speake filthy and immodest words. [sidenote: their
insolencie against strangers.] but towards other people, the said tartars
be most insolent, and they scorne and set nought by all other noble and
ignoble persons whatsoeuer. for we saw in the emperours court the great
duke of russia, the kings sonne of georgia, and many great soldanes
receiuing no due honour and estimation among them. so that euen the very
tartars assigned to giue attendance vnto them, were they neuer so base,
would alwaies goe before them, and take the vpper hand of them, yea, and
sometimes would constraine them to sit behinde their backes. moreouer they
are angrie and of a disdainfull nature vnto other people, and beyond all
measure deceitfull, and treacherous towards them. they speake fayre in the
beginning, but in conclusion, they sting like scorpions. for craftie they
are, and full of falshood, circumuenting all men whom they are able, by
their sleights. whatsoeuer mischiefe they entend to practise against a man
they keepe it wonderfully secrete so that he may by no meanes prouide for
himselfe, nor find a remedie against their conspiracies. they are vnmanerly
also and vncleanly in taking their meat and their drinke, and in other
actions. drunkennes is honourable among them, and when any of them hath
taken more drinke then his stomacke can well beare, hee casteth it vp and
falles to drinking againe. they are most intollerable exacters, most
couetous possessours, and most nigardly giuers. the slaughter of other
people is accompted a matter of nothing with them.


de legibus et consuetudinibus eorum. cap. 6.

[sidenote: poena adulterij.] hoc autem habent in lege siue consuetudine, vt
occidant viros et mulieres, si quando inueniantur in adulterio manifeste.
similiter etiam virginem, si fornicata fuerit cum aliquo, occidunt eam cum
eo. [sidenote: furti.] praterea si aliquis in prada vel furto manifesto
inuenitur, sine vlla miseratione occiditur. item si quis denudauit
consilia, maxime quando volunt ad bellum procedere, dantur ei super
posteriora centum plaga, quanto maiores vnus rusticus cum magno baculo
potest dare. [sidenote: arcani euulgati.] similiter cum aliqui de minoribus
offendunt in aliquo, non eis a maioribus suis parcitur, sed verberibus
grauiter affliguntur. matrimonio autem generaliter coniunguntur omnibus,
etiam propinquis carne, excepta matre et filia et sorore ex eadem matre.
nam sororem tantum ex patre, et vxorem quoque patris, post eius mortem
solent ducere. vxorem etiam fratris alius frater iunior, post eius mortem,
vel alius de parentela, tenetur ducere. [sidenote: andreas dux russia. vide
herbersteinium de rebus moschoui. pag. 8. b.] vnde, dum adhuc essemus in
terra, dux quidam russia, andreas nomine, apud baty, quod equos tartarorum
de terra educeret, et alijs venderet, accusatus est: quod licet non esset
probatum, occisus est. hoc audiens iunior frater, et vxor, occisi, pariter
venerunt ad prafatum ducem, supplicare volentes, ne terra auferretur
eisdem. at ille paruo pracepit, vt fratris defuncti duceret vxorem, mulieri
quoque vt ilium in virum duceret, secundum tartarorum consuetudinem. qua
respondit, se potius occidi velle, quam sic contra legem facere. at ille
nihilominus eam illi tradidit quamuis ambo renuerunt, quantum possent.
itaque ducentes eos in lectum, clamantem puerum et plorantem super illam
posuerunt, ipsosque commisceri pariter coegerunt. denique post mortem
maritorum, vxores. tartarorum non de facili solent ad secunda coniugia
transire, nisi forte quis velit soronam aut noueream suam ducere. nullo
vero differentia est apud eos inter filium vxoris et concubina, sed dat
pater quod vult vnicuique itaque si sunt etiam ex ducum genere, ita fit dux
filius concubina, sicut filius vxoris legitma. [sidenote: melich et dauid
fratres georgiani.] vnde cum rex georgia duos filios nuper, vnum scilicet
nomine melich legitimum alterum vero dauid ex adulterio natum haberet,
moriensque terra partem adultera filio reliquisset, melich, cui etiam ex
parte matris regnum obuenerat, quia per foeminas tenebatur, perrexit ad
imperatorem tartarorum, eo quod et dauid iter arripuerat ad ilium ambobus
igitur ad curiam venientibus, datisque maximis muneribus petebat adultera
filius, vt fieret ei iustitia secundum morem tartarorum. [sidenote: [greek:
polygamia.]] dataque est sententia contra melich, vt dauid, qui maior erat
natu, subesset, ac terram a patre sibi concessam quiete ac pacifice
possideret. cumque tartarorum vnus habet vxorum multitudinem, vnaquaque per
se suam habet familiam et stationem. et vna die tartarus comedit et bibit
et dormit cum vna, altera die cum alia. vna tamen inter cateras maior
habetur cum qua frequentius quam cum alijs commoratur et licet vt dictum
est, sint multa, nunquam tamen de facili contendunt inter se.


the same in english.

of their lawes and customes. chap. 6.

[sidenote: punishments of adultery.] moreouer, they haue this law or
custome, that whatsoeuer manor woman be manifestly taken in adultery, they
are punished with death. a virgine likewise that hath committed
fornication, they slay together with her mate. [sidenote: of theft. of
secretes disclosed.] whosoeuer be taken in robberie or theft, is put to
death without all pitie. also, if any man disclose their secrets,
especially in time of warre, he receiueth an hundreth blowes on the backe
with a bastinado, layd on by a tall fellow. in like sort when any
inferiours offend in ought, they finde no fauour at their superiours
handes, but are punished with grieuous stripes. [sidenote: lawes of
matrimonie.] they are ioyned in matrimony to all in generall, yea, euen to
their neare kinsfolkes except their mother, daughter and sister by the
mothers side. for they vse to marrie their sister by the fathers side
onely, and also the wife of their father after his decease. the yonger
brother also, or some other of his kindred, is bound to marry the wife of
his elder brother deceased. [sidenote: andreas duke of russia.] for, at the
time of our aboad in the countrey, a certaine duke of russia named andreas,
was accused before duke baty for conueying the tartars horses out of the
land, and for selling them to others: and although it could not be prooued,
yet was he put to death. his yonger brother and the wife of the party
deceased hearing this, came and made their supplication vnto the forenamed
duke, that the dukedome of russia might not be taken from them. but he
commanded the youth to marrie his deceased brothers wife, and the woman
also to take him vnto her husband, according to the custome of the tartars.
she answered, that she had rather die, than so haynously transgresse the
law. howbeit, hee deliuered her vnto him, although they both refused as
much as they could. wherefore carying them to bed, they constrained the
youth, lamenting and weeping, to lie down and commit incest with his
brothers wife. to be short, after the death of their husbands, the tartars
wiues vse very seldome to marrie the second time, vnlesse perhaps some man
takes his brothers wife or his stepmother in marriage. they make no
difference betweene the sonne of their wife and of their concubine, but the
father giues what he pleaseth vnto each one: [sidenote: melich and dauid
two brothers.] for of late the king of georgia hauing two sonnes, one
lawfully begotten call melich; but the other dauid, borne in adulterie, at
his death left part of his lande vnto his base sonne. hereupon melich (vnto
whome the kingdome fell by right of his mother, because it was gouerned
before time by women) went vnto the emperour of the tartars, dauid also
hauing taken his iourney vnto him. nowe bothe of them commmg to the court
and proffering large giftes, the sonne of the harlot made suite, that he
might haue iustice, according to the custome of the tartars. well, sentence
passed against melich, that dauid being his elder brother should haue
superioritie ouer him, and should quietly and peaceably possesse the
portion of land granted vnto him by his father. whensoeuer a tartar hath
many wiues, each one of them hath her family and dwelling place by her
selfe. and sometime the tartar eateth, drinketh and lieth with one, and
sometime with another. one is accompted chiefe among the rest, with whom
hee is oftener conuersant, then with the other. and notwithstanding (as it
hath bin said) they are many, yet do they seldome fal out among themselues.


de superstitiosis traditionibus ipsorum. cap. 7.

[sidenote: [greek: ethelothraskeia].] quibusdam vero traditionibus
indifferentia quadam esse peccata dicunt, quas vel ipsi vel antecessores
eorum confinxerunt. vnum est, cultellum in ignem figere, vel quocunque modo
ignem cultello tangere, vel etiam de caldaria cum cultello carnes
extrahere, vel cum securi iuxta ignem incidere. credunt enim, quod sic
auferri debeat caput igni. aliud est appodiare se ad flagellum, quo
percutitur equus: ipsi enim non vtuntur calcaribus. item flagello sagittas
tangere, iuuenes aues capere vel occidere, cum frano equum peroutere, os
cum osse alio frangere. itemque lac, vel aliquem potum aut cibum super
terram effundere, in statione mingere. quod si voluntarie facit, occiditur,
si autem aliter, oportet quod pecuniam multam incantatori soluat, a quo
purificetur. qui etiam faciat, vt statio cum omnibus, qua in ipsa sunt,
inter duos ignes transeat. antequam sic purificetur, nullus audet intrare,
nec aliquid de illa exportare. praterea si alicui morsellus imponitur, quem
deglutire non possit, et ilium de ore suo eijcit, foramen sub statione fit,
per quod extrahitur, ac sine vlla miseratione occiditur. [sidenote: [greek:
atheotaes].] iterum si quis caleat super limen stationis ducis alicuius,
interficitur. multa etiam habent his similia, qua reputant peccata. at
homines occidere, aliorum terras inuadere, ac res illorum diripere, et
contra dei pracepta vel prohibitiones facere, nullum apud eos est peccatum.
de vita aterna et damnatione perpetua nihil sciunt. credunt tamen, quod
post mortem in alio seculo viuant, gregesque multiplicent, comedant et
bibant, et patera faciant, qua hic a viuentibus fiunt. [sidenote: cultus
luna.] in principio lunationis vel in plenilunio incipiunt, quicquid noui
agere volunt, ipsamque lunam imperatorem magnum apellant, eamque
deprecantes genua flectunt. omnes, qui morantur in stationibus suis,
oportet per ignem purificari. [sidenote: lustrationis ritus.] qua scilicet
purificatio fit hoc modo. duos quidem ignes faciunt, et duas hastas iuxta
eos, vnamque cordam in summitate hastarum ponunt. ligantque super cordam
illam quasdam de bucaramo scissiones, sub qua scilicet corda et ligaturis
inter illos ignes transeunt homines, ac bestia ac stationes. sunt etiam dua
mulieres, vna hinc, et alia inde aquam proijcientes, ac quadam carmina
recitantes. caterum si aliquis a fulgure occiditur, oportet pradicto modo
per ignes transire omnes illos, qui in illis stationibus morantur. statio
siquidem ac lectus et currus, filtra et vestes, et quicquid talium habent,
a nullo tanguntur, sed ab hominibus tanquam immunda respuuntur. [sidenote:
ignis super stitiosa efficacitas.] et vt breuiter dicam, omnia purificari
credunt per ignem. vnde quando veniunt ad eos nuncij, vel principes, aut
qualescunque persona, oportet ipsos et munera sua per duos ignes, vt
purificentur, transire, ne forte veneficia fecerint, aut venenum seu
aliquid mali attulerint.


the same in english.

of their superstitious traditions. chap. 7.

[sidenote: ridiculous traditions. ] but by reason of traditions, which
either they or their predecessors haue deuised, they accompt some things
indifferent to be faults. one is to thrust a knife into the fire, or any
way to touch the fire with a knife, or with their knife to take flesh out
of the cauldron, or to hewe with an hatchet neare vnto the fire. for they
think by that means to take away the head or force from the fire. another
is to leane vpon the whip, wherewith they beate their horses: for they ride
not with spurs. also, to touch arrowes with a whip, to take or kill yong
birds, to strike an horse with the raine of their bridle, and to breake one
bone against another. also, to powre out milke, meate, or any kinde of
drinke vpon the ground or to make water within their tabernacle: which
whosoeuer doth willingly, he is slaine, but otherwise he must pay a great
summe of money to the inchanter to be purified. who likewise must cause the
tabernacle with all things therein, to passe betweene two fiers. before it
be on this wise purified, no man dare once enter into it, nor conueigh any
thing thereout. besides, if any man hath a morsell giuen him, which he is
not able to swallow, and for that cause casteth it out of his mouth, there
is an hole made vnder his tabernacle, by which hee is drawen forth and
slaine without all compassion. likewise, whosoeuer treads vpon the
threshold of any of their dukes tabernacles, he is put to death. many other
things there be, like vnto these, which they take for heinous offences. but
to slay men, to inuade the dominions of other people, and to rifle their
goods, to transgresse the commaundements and prohibitions of god, are with
them no offences at all. they know nothing concerning eternall life, and
euerlasting damnation, and yet they thinke, that after death they shall
liue in another world, that they shall multiply their cattell, that they
shal eate and drinke and doe other things which liuing men performe here
vpon earth. [sidenote: the tartars worship the moone.] at a new moone, or a
full moone, they begin all enterprises that they take in hand, and they
call the moone the great emperour, and worship it vpon their knees. all men
that abide in their tabernacles must be purified with fire: which
purification is on this wise. [sidenote: their custome of purifying.] they
kindle two fires, and pitch two iauelines into the ground neere vnto the
said fires, binding a corde to the tops of the iauelines. and about the
corde they tye certaine iagges of buckram, vnder which corde, and betweene
which fires, men, beastes, and tabernacles do passe. there stand two women
also, one on the right side, and another on the left casting water, and
repeating certaine charmes. if any man be slaine by lightning, all that
dwell in the same tabernacle with him must passe by fire in maner
aforesaid. for their tabernacles, beds, and cartes, their feltes and
garments, and whatsoeuer such things they haue, are touched by no man, yea,
and are abandoned by all men as things vncleane. and to bee short, they
think that all things are to be purged by fire. therefore, when any
ambassadours, princes, or other personages whatsoeuer come vnto them, they
and their giftes must passe betweene two fires to be purified, lest
peraduenture they haue practised some witchcraft, or haue brought some
poyson or other mischiefe with them.


de initio imperij siue principatus eorum. cap. 8.

[sidenote: tartaria populi.] terra quidem ilia orientalis, de qua dictum
est supra, qua mongal nominatur, quatuor quondam habuisse populos
memoratur. vnus eorum yeka mongal, id est, magni mongali vocabantur.
secundus sumongal, id est, aquatici mongali, qui seipsos appellabant
tartaros, a quodam fluuio per eorem terram currente, qui tartar nominatur.
tertius appellabatur merkat. quartus vero metrit. omnes vnam personarum
formam et vnam linguam habebant hi populi, quamuis inter se per principes
ac prouincias essent diuisi. [sidenote: chingis ortus et res gesta.] in
terra yeka mongal quidam fuit, qui vocabatur chingis. iste coepit robustus
venator esse: didicit enim homines furari, et pradam capere. ad alias
terras ibat, et quoscunque poterat, captiuabat, sibique associabat. homines
quoque sua gentis inclinauit ad se, qui tanquam ducem sequebantur ipsum ad
male agendum. coepit autem pugnare cum sumongal, siue cum tartaris, et
ducem eorem interfecit, multoque bello sibi tartaros omnes subiecit, et in
seruitutem redigit. post hac cum istis omnibus contra merkatas, iuxta tenam
positos tartarorum pugnauit, quos etiam bello sibi subiecit. [sidenote:
naymani. infra cap. 25.] inde procedens contra metritas pugnam exercuit, et
illos etiam obtinuit. audientes naymani, quod chingis taliter eleuatus
esset, indignati sunt. ipsi enim habuerant imperatorem strenuum valde, cui
dabant tributum cuncta nationes pradicta. [sidenote: fratres discordantes
oppressi.] qui cum esset mortuus, filij eius successerunt loco ipsius. sed
quia iuuenes ac stulti erant, populum tenere nesciebant, sed ad inuicem
diuisi ac scissi erant. vnde chingi pradicto modo iam exaltato, nihilominus
in terras pradictas faciebant insultum, et habitatores occidebant, ac
diripiebant pradam eorum. quod audiens chingis, omnes sibi subiectos
congregauit. naymani et karakytay ex aduerso similiter in quandam vallem
strictam conuenerunt, et commissum est pralium, in quo naymani et karakytay
a mongalis deuicti sunt. qui etiam pro maiori parte occisi fuerunt, et
alij, qui euadere non potuerunt, in seruitutem redacti sunt. [sidenote:
occoday cham.] in terra pradictorum karakytaorum occoday cham, filius
chingischam, postquam imperator fuit positus, quandam ciuitatem adificauit,
quam chanyl appellauit. [sidenote: homines syluestres.] prope quam ad
meridiem est quoddam desertum magnum, in quo pro certo syluestres homines
habitare dicuntur, qui nullatenus loquuntur, nec iuncturas in cruribus
habent, et si quando cadunt, per se surgere non valent. sed tamen
discretionem tantam habent, quod filtra de lana camelorum quibus
vestiuntur, faciunt et contra ventum ponunt. et si quando tartari pergentes
ad eos vulnerant eos sagittis, gramina in vulneribus ponunt, et fortiter
ante ipsios fugiunt.


the same in english.

of the beginning of their empire or gouernment. chap. 8.

[sidenote: the people of tartarie. ]

the east countrie, whereof wee haue entreated, which is called mongal, is
reported to haue had of olde time foure sortes of people. one of their
companions was called yeka mongal, that is the great mongals. the second
company was called sumongal, that is, the water-mongals, who called
themselues tartars of a certaine riuer running through their countrey named
tartar. the third was called merkat, and the fourth metrit. all these
people had one and the same person, attire of body and language, albeit
they were diuided by princes and prouinces. [sidenote: the original and the
exploits of chingis.] in the prouince of yeka mongol, there was a certaine
man called chingis. this man became a mighty hunter. for he learned to
steale men, and take them for a pray. he ranged into other countries taking
as many captiues as he could, and ioining them vnto himselfe. also hee
allured the men of his owne countrey vnto him, who followed him as their
captaine and ringleader to doe mischiefe. then began he to make warre vpon
the sumongals or tartars, and slewe their captaine, and after many
conflicts, subdued them vnto himselfe, and brought them all into bondage.
afterwards he vsed their helpe to fight against the merkats, dwelling by
the tartars, whom also hee vanquished in battell. proceeding from thence,
he fought against the metrites, and conquered them also. [sidenote: the
naimani.] the naimani hearing that chingis was thus exalted, greatly
disdeined thereat. for they had a mighty and puissant emperour, vnto whom
all the foresaid nations payed tribute. whose sonnes, when he was dead,
succeeded him in his empire. [sidenote: the discord of brethren.] howbeit,
being young and foolish, they knew not howe to gouerne the people, but were
diuided, and fell at variance among themselues. now chingis being exalted,
as is aforesaid, they neuerthelesse inuaded the forenamed countries, put
the inhabitants to the sword, and carried away their goods for a pray.
which chingis hauing intelligence of, gathered all his subiects together.
the naimani also, and the people called karakitay assembled and banded
themselues at a certaine straight valley, where, after a battell foughten
they were vanquished by the mongals. and being thus vanquished, they were,
the greater part of them, slaine; and others, which could not escape, were
carried into captiuitie. [sidenote: occoday cham.] in the land of the
foresayd karakytayans, occoday cham, the sonne of chingis cham, after he
was created emperour, built a certaine citie, which he called chanyl. neare
vnto which citie, on the south side, there is an huge desert, wherein wilde
men are certainely reported to inhabite, which cannot speake at all, and
are destitute of ioynts in their legges, so that if they fall, they cannot
rise alone by themselues. howbeit, they are of discretion to make feltes of
camels haire, wherewith they clothe themselues, and which they holde
against the winde. and if at any time, the tartars pursuing them, chance to
wound them with their arrowes, they put herbes into their wounds and flye
strongly before them.


de mutua victoria ipsorum et kythaorum. cap. 9.

mongali autem in terram suam reuertentes, se contra [marginal note:
haythono et paulo veneto sunt cathay.] kythaos ad pralium parauerunt, et
castra mouentes, eorum terram intrauerunt. [sidenote: tartarorum cathayna
clades.] quod audiens eorum imperator, vnit cum exercitu suo contra illos,
et commissum est pralium durum, in quo mongali sunt deuicti, omnesque
nobiles eorum, qui erant in exercitu, prater septem occisi sunt. vnde cum
illis volentibus aliquam impugnare regionem, minatur aliquis stragem, adhuc
respondent: olim etiam occisi non nisi septem remansimus, et tamen modo
creuimus in multitudinem magnam, ideoque non terremur de talibus. chingis
autem et alij, qui remanserunt, in terram suam fugerunt. cumque quieuisset
aliquantulum, praparauit se rursus ad pralium, et processit contra terram
huyrorum. isti sunt homines christiani de secta nestorianorum. [sidenote:
noua victoria. litera.] et hos etiam mongali deuicerunt, eorumque literam
acceperunt; prius enim scripturam non habebant, nunc autem eandem
mongalorem literam appellant. inde contra terram saruyur, et contra terram
karanitarum, et contra terram hudirat processit, quos omnes bello deuicit.
inde in terram suam redijt, et aliquantulum quieuit. deinde conuocatis
omnibus hominibus suis, contra kythaos pariter processerunt, diuque contra
illos pugnantes, magnam partem terra illorum vicerunt, eorumque imperatorem
in ciuitatem suam maiorem concluserunt. quam et tam longo tempore
obsederunt, quod exercitus expensa omnino, defecerunt. cumque iam quod
manducarent, penitus non haberent, pracipit chingischam suis, vt de decem
hominibus vnum ad manducandum darent. [sidenote: argentum loco lapidum in
hostem proiectum.] illi vero de ciuitate machinis et sagittis viriliter
contra istos pugnabant et cum deficerent lapides, argentum et maxime
liquefactum proijciebant. ciuitas siquidem illa multis erat diuitijs plena.
cumque diu mongali pugnassent, et eam bello vincere non possent, vnam
magnam sub terra viam ab exercitu vsque ad medium ciuitatis fecerunt, et
prosilientes in medium eius, contra ciues pugnauerunt. illi quoque qui
extra remanserant, eodem modo contra illos pugnabant. denique concidentes
portas ciuitatis intrauerunt, et imperatorem cum pluribus occidentes vrbem
possederunt, aurumque et argentum, et omnes eius diuitias abstulerunt.
[sidenote: chingis salutatur imperator.] et cum aliquos terra suos homines
nuntios praficissent, in terram propriam reuersi sunt. tunc primum
imperatore kythaorum deuncto, factus est chingischam imperator quandam
tamen partem illius terra, quia posita erat in mari nullatenus deuicerunt
vsque hodie. [sidenote: cathaynorum litera et religio.] sunt autem kitai
homines pagani, habentes literam specialem, et etiam vt dicitur, veteris et
noui testamenti scripturam. habent etiam vitas patrum et eremitas et domes,
in quibus orant temporibus suis, ad modum ecclesiarum facias. quosdam etiam
sanctos habere se dicunt, et vnum deum colunt. christum iesvm dominum
venerantur, et credunt vitam aternam, sed non baptizantur. scripturam
nostram honorant ac reuerentur. christianos diligunt, et eleemosynas plures
faciunt, homines benigni satis et humani videntur. barbam non habent, et in
dispositione faciei cum mongalis in parte concordant. [sidenote:
opificiorum [greek: exochae].] meliores artifices in mundo non inueniuntur
in omnibus operibus, in quibus homines exercentur. terra eonira est
opulenta numis in frumento et vino, auro et serico ac rebus cateris.


the same in english

of the mutuall victories betweene them, and the pepole of kythay. chap. 9.

but the mongals returning home into their owne countrey prepared themselues
to battell against the kythayans: [marginal note: haython [1] and paulus
venetus [2] call them cathayans. [footnote 1: bishop of basle, was sent by
charlemagne as ambassador to nicephorus emperor of constantinople, in 811.
he published an account of his journey which he called his _itinerarium_.
there is a curious capitulary of his, inserted in lucas of acheri's
_spicilegium_.] [footnote 2: better known as fra paolo, or paul sarpi, the
citizen monk of venice who has been said to have been "a catholic in
general, but a protestant in particular". his attempted assassination on
the piazza of st mark at venice by order of paul v, the pope is still one
of the fauourite legends of the city of gondolas. he is said to have
discouered the circulation of the blood. he died in 1623. (see _native
races of america_, in goldsmid's _bibliothica curiosa_, p 17).]] which
their emperour hearing, set forward against them with his armie, and they
fought a cruell battell, wherein the mongals were ouercome, and all their
nobles in the armie, except seuen, were slaine. and for this cause, when
they, purposing to inuade anie region, are threatned by the inhabitants
thereof to be slaine, they doe, to this day, answere: in old time also our
whole number besides being slaine, we remayned but seuen of vs aliue, and
yet notwithstanding we are now growen vnto a great multitude, thinke not
therefore to daunt vs with such brags. [sidenote: new victories.] but
chingis and the residue that remained aliue, fled home into their countrey:
and hauing breathed him a little, he prepared himselfe to warre, and went
forth against the people called huyri: these men were christians of the
sect of nestorius. [sidenote: letters.] and these also the mongals
ouercame, and receiued letters or learning from them: for before that time
they had not the arte of writing, and nowe they call it the hand or letters
of the mongals. immediately after, hee marched against the countrey of
saruyur, and of the karanites, and against the land of hudirat; all which
he vanquished. then returned he home into his owne countrey, and breathed
himselfe. afterward, assembling his warlike troupes, they marched with one
accord against the kythayans, and waging warre with them a long time, they
conquered, a great part of their land, and shut vp their emperour into his
greatest citie: which citie they had so long time besieged, that they began
to want necessary prouision for their armie. and when they had no victuals
to feede vpon, chingis cham commaunded his souldiers that they should eate
euery tenth man of the companie. [sidenote: siluer cast at the enemie
instead of stones.] but they of the citie fought manfully against them,
with engines, dartes, and arrowes, and when stones wanted they threw
siluer, and especially melted siluer: for the same citie abounded with
great riches. also, when the mongals had fought a long time and could not
preuale by warre, they made a great trench vnderneath the ground from the
armie vnto the middest of the citie, and there issuing foorth they fought
against the citizens, and the remnant also without the walles fought in
like manner. at last, breaking open the gates of the citie, they entred,
and putting the emperour, with many other to the sworde, they tooke
possession thereof and conueighed away the golde, siluer, and all the
riches therein. and hauing appointed certaine deputies ouer the countrey,
they returned home into their owne lande. [sidenote: chigis cham proclaimed
emperour.] this is the first time, when the emperour of the kythayans being
vanquished, chingis cham obtayned the empire. [sidenote: part of cathay in
the sea.] but some parte of the countrey, because it lyeth within the sea,
they could by no meanes conquere vnto this day. [sidenote: the letters and
the religion of the cathayans.] the men of kytay are pagans, hauing a
speciall kinde of writing by themselues, and (as it is reported) the
scriptures of the olde and newe testament. they haue also recorded in
hystories the liues of their forefathers and they haue eremites, and
certaine houses made after the manner of our churches. which in those dayes
they greatly resorted vnto. they say that they haue diuers saints also, and
they worship one god. they adore and reuerence christ iesus our lorde, and
beleeue the article of eternall life, but are not baptized. they doe also
honourably esteeme and reuerence our scriptures. they loue christians, and
bestowe much almes, and are a very courteous and gentle people. they haue
no beardes, and they agree partly with the mongals in the disposition of
their countenance. [sidenote: their excelent workmanship.] in all
occupations which men practise, there are not better artificers in the
whole worlde. their countrey is exceeding rich, in corne, wine, golde,
silke, and other commodities.


de pugna ipsorum contra indiam minorem et maiorem. cap. 10.

cum autem mongali cum imperatore suo chingischam post prafatam victoriam
aliquantulum quieuissent, exercitus suos diuiserunt. [sidenote: thossut
can, chingis f.] imperator siquidem vnum de filijs suis nomine thosut, quem
etiam can, id est, imperatorem, appellabant, cum exercitu contra comanos
misit, quos ille multo bello deuicit, et postmodum in terram suam redijt.
[sidenote: india minor debellata.] alium vero filium cum exercitu contra
indos misit, qui et minorem indiam subiecit. hi sunt nigri sarraceni, qui
athiopes sunt vocati. hic autem excercitus ad pugnam contra christianos,
qui sunt in india maiori, processit. [sidenote: regis maioris india
stratagema.] quod audiens rex illus terra, qui vulgo [marginal note: vide
scolion in lib 1. cap. 51. m. pauli veneti.] presbyter iohannes appellatur,
contra illos venit exercitu congregato. et faciens imagines cupreas
hominum, vnamquanque posuit in sella super equum. posuit et interius ignem,
et hominem cum folle super equum post imaginem. itaque cum multis equis et
imaginibus, taliter praparatis, ad pugnam contra mongalos seu tartaros
processerunt. et cum ad locum pralij peruenissent equos istos vnum iuxta
alium pramiserunt. viri autem qui erant retro, nescio quid super ignem, qui
erat intra imagines, posuerunt, et cum follibus fortiter sufflauerunt. vnde
factum est, vt ex graco igne homines et equi comburerentur, et etiam aer ex
fumo denigrantur. [sidenote: victoria.] tumque super tartaros sagittas
iecerunt indi, ex quibus multi vulnerati fuerunt et interfecti. sicque
eiecerunt illos cum magna confusione de suis finibus, nec vnquam, quod ad
ipsos vltra redierint audiuimus.


the same in english.

of their warre against india maior and minor. chap. 10.

and when the mongals with their emperour chingis cham had a while rested
themselues after the foresayd victorie, they diuided their armies.
[sidenote: thossut can son of chingis.] for the emperour sent one of his
sonnes named thossut (whom also they called can, that is to say, emperour)
with an armie against the people of comania, whom he vanquished with much
warre, and afterward returned into his owne country. [sidenote: india minor
subdued.] but he sent his other sonne with an armie against the indians,
who also subdued india minor. these indians are the blacke saracens, which
are also called athiopians. but here the armie marched forward to fight
against christians dwelling in india maior. which the king of that countrey
hearing (who is commonly called presbiter iohn) gathered his souldiers
together, and came foorth against them. and making mens images of copper,
he set each of them vpon a saddle on horsebacke, and put fire within them,
and placed a man with a paire of bellowes on the horse backe behinde euery
image. [sidenote: the stratagem of the king of india.] and so with many
horses and images in such sorte furnished, they marched on to fight against
the mongals or tartars. and comming neare vnto the place of the battell,
they first of all sent those horses in order one after another. but the men
that sate behind laide i wote not what vpon the fire within the images, and
blew strongly with their bellowes. whereupon it came to passe, that the men
and the horses were burnt with wilde fire, and the ayre was darkened with
smoake. then the indians cast dartes vpon the tartars, of whom many were
wounded and slain. and so they expelled them out of their dominions with
great confusion, neither did we heare, that euer they returned thither
againe.


qualiter ab hominibus caninis repulsi, burithabethinos vicerunt. cap. 11.

[sidenote: de monstrosis mulieribus et canibus monstrosa narratio. forsam
totem videri allegorica allusio possit ad canibales de quibus petrus [1]
martyr mediolan de rebus occatucis. [footnote 1: born at florence in 1500,
he entered the church very young, but the reading of the works of zwingler
and bucer led him to join the reformers. he withdrew to basle, where he
married a young nun. he passed over to england in 1547, and obtained a
chair of theology at oxford, but mary caused him to be expelled. he
withdrew to augsburg, and thence to zurich, where he died in 1562. his real
name was pietro vermigli.]] cum autem per deserta redirent, in quandam
terram venerunt, in qua, sicut nobis apud imperatoris curiam per clericos
ruthenos, et alios, qui diu fuerant inter ipsos, firmiter asserendo
referebatur, monstra quadam, imaginem foemineam habentia, repererunt. quas
cum per multos interpretes interrogassent, vbi viri terra illius essent,
responderunt, quod in illa terra quanunque foemina nascebantur, habebant
formam humanam, masculi vero speciem caninam. dumque moram in terra illa
protraherent, canes in alia fluuij parte conuenerunt. et cum esset hyems
asperrima omnes se in aquam proiecerunt. post hac incontinenti sponte in
puluerem voluebantur, sicque puluis admixtus aqua super eos corugelabatur,
et vt ita pluries fecerunt, glacie super eos depressata, cum impetu magno
contra tartaros ad pugnam conuenerunt. at vero cum illi sagittas super eos
iaciebant, ac si super lapides sagittassent, retro sagitta redibant. alia
quoque arma eorum in nullo eos ledere poterant. ipsi vero canes insultum in
tartaros iacientes, morsibus vulnerauerunt multos, et occiderunt sicque
illos de suis finibus eiecerunt. vnde adhuc inter illos est prouerbium de
hoc facto, quod dicunt ad inuicem ridendo: pater meus vel frater meus a
canibus fuit occisus. mulieres autem illorum, quas ceperant, ad terram suam
duxerunt, et vsque ad diem mortis eorum ibidem fuerunt. [sidenote:
burithabeth regio. incolarum mores.] cum autem exercitus ille mongalorum
rediret, venit ad terram burithabeth, cuius habitatores pagani sunt, et hos
tartari bello vicerunt. hi consuetudinem habent mirabilem, imo potius
miserabilem. cum enim alicuius pater humana natura soluit debitum,
congregant omnem parentelam, et comedunt eum. hi pilos in barba non habent,
imo ferrum quoddam in manibus, sicut vidimus, portant, cum quo semper
barbam, si forte crinis aliquis in ea crescit, depilant. multi etiam
deformes sunt. inde vero ille tartarorum exercitus in terram suam est
reuersus.


the same in english

how being repelled by monstrous men shapen like dogs, they ouercame the
  people of burithabeth. chap. 11.

[sidenote: a strange report of certain monstrous women and dogs.] but
returning through the deserts, they came vnto a certaine countrey, wherein
(as it was reported vnto vs in the emperours court, by certaine clergie men
of russia and others, who were long time among them, and that by strong and
stedfast affirmation) they found certaine monsters resembling women who
being asked by many interpreters, where the men of that land were, they
answered, that whatsoeuer women were borne there, were indued with the
shape of mankinde, but the males were like vnto dogges. and delaying the
time, in that countrey they met with the said dogges on the other side of
the riuer. and in the midst of sharpe winter, they cast themselues into the
water: afterward they wallowed in the dust vpon the maine land and so the
dust being mingled with water, was frozen to their backes, and hauing often
times so done, the ice being strongly frozen vpon them, with great fury
they came to fight against the tartars. and when the tartars threwe their
dartes, or shot their arrowes among them, they rebounded backe againe, as
if they had lighted vpon stones. and the rest of their weapons coulde by no
meanes hurt them. howbeit the dogges made an assault vpon the tartars, and
wounding some of them with their teeth, and slaying others at length they
draue them out of their countries. and thereupon they haue a prouerbe of
the same matter, as yet rife among them, which they speake in iesting sorte
one to another: my father or my brother was slaine of dogges. the women
which they tooke they brought into their owne countrey, who remayned there
till their dying day. [sidenote: the region of burithabeth.] and in
traueling homewardes, the sayd armie of the mongals came vnto the lande of
burithabeth (the inhabitants whereof are pagans) and conquered the people
in battell. these people haue a strange or rather a miserable kinde of
custome. [sidenote: the manners of the people.] for when anie man's father
deceaseth, he assembleth all his kindred and they eate him. these men haue
no beards at all, for we saw them carie a certaine iron instrument in their
hands wherewith, if any haires growe vpon their chinne, they presently
plucke them out. they are also very deformed. from thence the tartars army
returned to their owne home.


qualiter a montibus caspijs, et ab hommibus subterraneis repulsi sunt.
  cap. 12.

[sidenote: alia chingis expeditio.]

chingischam etiam illo tempore, quo dimisit alios exercitus contra
orientem, per terram kergis cum cxpeditione perrexit, quos tamen tunc bello
non vicit et vt nobis dicebatur, ibidem vsque ad montes caspios peruenit.
at illi montes in ea parte, ad quam applicauerunt, de lapide adamantino
sunt: ideoque sagittas et arma ferrea illorum ad se traxerunt. homines
autem inter caspios montes conclusi clamorem exercitus, vt creditur,
audientes, montem frangere coeperunt, et cum alio tempore post decem annos
redirent tartari, montem confractum inuenerunt. cumque ad illos accedere
attentassent, minime potuerunt: quia nubes quadam erat posita ante ipsos,
vltra quam ire nullatenus poterant. omnino quippe visum amittebant, statim
vt ad illam perueniebant. [marginal note: vide an hamsem regionem dicat de
qua haythonus cap. 10.] illi autem ex aduerso credentes, quod tartari ad
illos accedere formidarent, insultum contra eos fecerunt, sed statim vt
peruenerunt ad nubem propter causam pradictam, procedere non potuerunt. ac
vero antequam ad montes pradictos peruenirent tartari, plusquam per mensem
per vastam solitudinem transierunt, et inde procedentes adhuc contra
orientem, plusquam per mensem per magnum desertum perrexerunt. itaque
peruenerunt ad quandam terram, in qua vias quidem tritas videbant, sed
neminem inuenire poterant. tandem quarentes, vnum hominem cum vxore sua
repererunt, quos in prasentiam chingischam adduuerunt. [sidenote:
troglodyta.] qui cum interrogasset illos vbi homines allius terra essent,
responderunt, quod in terra sub montibus habitarent. tunc chingischam
retenta vxore, misit ad eos virum illum, mandans illis, vt venirent ad
ipsius mandatum. qui pergens ad illos, omnia narrauit, qua chingischam eis
mandauit. illi vero respondentes dixerunt, quod die tali venirent ad ipsum,
vt facerent eius mandatum. ac ipsi medio tempore per vias occultas sub
terra se congregantes, ad pugnam contra illos venerunt, et subito super eos
irruentes, plurimos occiderunt. [sidenote: fabulosus solis orientis
sonitus.] solis quoque sonitus in ortu suo sustinere non poterant, imo
tempore, quo oriebatur, oportebat eos vnam aurem ad terram ponere, et
superiorem fortiter obturare, ne sonum illum terribilem audirent. nec sic
tamen cauere poterant, quin hac de causa plurimi ex eis interirent. videns
ergo chingischam et sui, quod nihil proficerent, sed potius homines suos
perderent, fugerunt, ac terra illa exierunt. illum tamen virum cum vxore
sua secum deduxerunt, qui etiam vsque ad mortem in terra eorum fuerunt.
interrogati vero, cur in regione sua sub terra soleant habitare, dixerunt,
quod ibi quodam tempore anni, cum oritur sol, tantus fit sonitus, vt
homines nulla ratione valeant sustmere. quin etiam tunc in organis et
tympanis caterisque musicis instrumentis percutere solent, vt sonitum illum
non audiant.


the same in english.

how they had the repulse at the caspian mountaynes, and were driuen backe
  by men dwelling in caues. chap 12.

[sidenote: another expedition of chingis.] moreouer chingis cham, at the
same time when he sent other armies against the east, hee himselfe marched
with a power into the lande of kergis, which notwithstanding, he conquered
not in that expedition and as it was reported vnto vs, he went on forward
euen to the caspian mountaines. but the mountaines on that part where they
encamped themselues, were of adamant, and therefore they drew vnto them
their arrowes, and weapons of iron. and certaine men contained within those
caspian mountaynes, hearing as it was thought, the noyse of the armie, made
a breach through, so that when the tartars returned vnto the same place
tenne yeeres after, they found the mountaine broken. and attempting to goe
vnto them, they could not: for there stood a cloud before them, beyond
which they were not able to passe, being depriued of their sight so soone
as they approached thereunto. but they on the contrary side thinking that
the tartars durst not come nigh them gaue the assault, and when they came
at the cloud, they could not proceed for the cause aforesaid. also the
tartars, before they came vnto the said mountaines, passed for the space of
a moneth and more, through a vast wildernes, and departing thence towards
the east, they were aboue a moneth traueiling through another huge desert.
at length, they came vnto a land wherin they saw beaten waies, but could
not find any people. howbeit at the last, diligently seeking, they found a
man and his wife, whom they presented before chingis cham: and demanding of
them where the people of that countrey were, they answered, that the people
inhabited vnder the ground in mountains. then chingis cham keeping still
the woman, sent her husband vnto them, giuing them charge to come at his
command. and going vnto them, he declared all things that chingis cham had
commanded them. but they answered, that they would vpon such a day visite
him, to satisfie his desire. and in the meane season by blinde and hidden
passages vnder the earth, assembling themselues they came against the
tartars in warlike manner, and suddenly issuing forth, they slewe a great
number of them. [sidenote: a fabulous narration of the sun rising.] this
people were not able to endure the terrible noise, which in that place the
sunne made at his vprising: for at the time of the sunne rising, they were
inforced to lay one eare vpon the ground, and to stoppe the other close,
least they should heare that dreadfull sound. neither could they so escape,
for by this meanes many of them were destroyed. chingis cham therefore and
his company, seeing that they preuailed not, but continually lost some of
their number, fled and departed out of that land. but the man and his wife
aforesaid they caried along with them, who all their life time continued in
the tartars countrey. being demaunded why the men of their countrey doe
inhabite vnder the ground, they sayd, that at a certeine time of the yeare,
when the sunne riseth, there is such an huge noyse, that the people cannot
endure it. moreouer, they vse to play vpon cymbals, drums, and other
musicall instruments, to the ende they may not heare that sounde.


de statutis chingischam, et morte ipsius, et filijs ac ducibus. cap. 13.

cum autem de terra illa reuerteretur chingischam, defecerunt eis victualia,
famemque patiebantur maximam. tunc interiora vnius bestia recentia casu
inuenerunt: qua accipientes, depositis tantum stercoribus, decoxerunt, et
coram chingischam deportata pariter comederunt. [sidenote: chingis lex.]
ideoque statuit chingischam, vt nec sanguis, nec interiora, nec aliquid de
bestia, qua manducari potest, proijciatur, exceptis stercoribus. inde ergo
in terram propriam reuersus est, ibique leges et statuta edidit, qua
tartari inuiolabiliter obseruant, de quibus scilicet iam alias superius
dictum est. post hoc ab ictu tonitrui occissus est. [sidenote: liberi.]
habuit autem quatuor filios: occoday vocobatur primus, thossut can
secundus, thiaday tertius, quarti nomen ignoramus. ab his iiij.
descenderunt omnes duces mongalorum. primus filiorum occoday est cuyne, qui
nunc est imperator. [sidenote: nepotes.] huius fratres cocten et chyrenen.
ex filijs autem thossut can sunt bathy, ordu, siba, bora. bathy post
imperatorem omnibus ditior est ac potentior. ordu vero omnium ducum senior.
filij thiaday, sunt hurin et cadan. filij autem alterius filij chingischam,
cuius ignoramus nomen, sunt, mengu et bithat et alij plures. huius mengu
mater seroctan est, domina magna inter tartaros. excepta imperatoris matre
plus nominata, omnibusque potentior, excepto bathy. [sidenote: duces.] hac
autem sunt nomina ducum: ordu, qui fuit in polonia, et hungaria, bathy
quoque et huryn et cadan et syban et ouygat, qui omnes fuerunt in hungaria.
sed et cyrpodan, qui adhuc est vltra mare contra quosdam soldanos
sarracenorum, et alios habitatores terra transmarina. alij vero remanserunt
in terra, scilicet mengu. chyrenen, hubilai, sinocur, cara, gay, sybedey,
bora, berca, corrensa. alij quoque duces eorum plures sunt, quorum nomina
nobis ignota sunt.


the same in english.

of the statutes of chingis cham, of his death, of his sonnes, and of his
  dukes. chap. 13.

but as chingis cham returned out of that countrey, his people wanted
victuals, and suffered extreme famin. then by chance they found the fresh
intrails of a beast: which they tooke, and casting away the dung therof,
caused it to be sodden, brought it before chingis cham, and did eat therof.
[sidenote: the lawe of chingis.] and hereupon chingis cham enacted: that
neither the blood, nor the intrails, nor any other part of a beast which
might be eaten, should be cast away, saue onely the dunge. wherefore he
returned thence into his owne land, and there he ordayned lawes and
statutes, which the tartars doe most strictly and inuiolably obserue, of
the which we haue before spoken. [sidenote: the death of chingis. his
sonnes.] he was afterward slaine by a thunderclap. he had foure sonnes: the
first was called occoday, the second thossut can, the third thiaday: the
name of the fourth is vnknowen. from these foure descended all the dukes of
the mongals. [sidenote: his graund children.] the first sonne of occoday is
cuyne, who is now emperour: his brothers be cocten and chyrinen. the sons
of thossut can are bathy, ordu, siba, and bora bathy, next vnto the
emperour, is richer and mightier then all the rest. but ordu is the
seignior of all the dukes. the sonnes of thiaday be hurin and cadan. the
sonnes of chingis cham his other sonne, whose name is vnknowen, are mengu,
bithat and certaine others. the mother of mengu was named seroctan, and of
all others most honoured among the tartars, except the emperors mother, and
mightier than any subiect except bathy. [sidenote: the tartarian dukes.]
these be the names of the dukes: ordu, who was in poland and in hungarie:
bathy also and hurin and cadan, and siban, and ouygat, all which were in
hungarie. in like maner cyrpodan, who is as yet beyond the sea, making war
against certaine soldans of the saracens, and other inhabitants of farre
countries. others remained in the land, as namely mengu, chyrinen, hubilai,
sinocur, caray, gay, sybedey, bora, berca, corrensa. there be many other of
their dukes, whose names are vnknowen vnto vs.


de postestate imperatoris et ducum eius. cap. 14.

[sidenote: imperatoris tartarorum seruile in omnes imperium.]

porro imperator eorum, scilicet tartarorum, super omnes habet mirabile
dominium. nullus enim audet in aliqua morari parte, nisi vbi assignauerit
ipse. et ipse quidem assignat ducibus vbi maneant. duces autem loca
millenarijs assignant, millenarij vero centenarijs et centenarij decanis.
quicquid autem eis pracipitur, quocunque tempore, quocunque loco, siue, ad
bellum, siue ad mortem, vel vbicunque sine vlla obediunt contradictione.
nam etsi petit alicuius filiam virginem, vel sororem, mox ei sine
contradictione exponunt eam, imo frequenter colligit virgines ex omnibus
tartarorum finibus, et si vult aliquas retinere, sibi retinet, alias vero
dat suis homimbus. nuncios etiam quoscunque et vbicunque transmittat,
oportet quod dent ei sine mora equos et expensas. similiter vndecunque
veniant ei tributa vel nuncij, oportet equos et currus et expensas tribui.
[sidenote: inhumanitas erga legatos.] ac vero nuncij, qui aliunde veniunt,
in magna miseria, et victus et vestitus penuria sunt. maximeque quando
veniunt ad principes, et ibi debent moram contrahere. tunc adeo parum datur
decem hominibus, quod vix inde possent duo viuere. insuper et si aliqua
illis iniuria fiunt, minime conqueri facile possunt. multa quoque munera
tam a principibus quam a cateris ab illis petuntur: qua si non dederint,
vilipenduntur, et quasi pro nihilo reputantur. hinc et nos magnam partem
rerum, qua nobis pro expensis a fidelibus erant data, de necessitate
oportuit in muneribus dare. denique sic omnia sunt in manu imperatoris,
quod nemo audet dicere, hoc meum est vel illius, sed omnia, scilicet res et
iumenta ac homines, sunt ipsius. super hoc etiam nuper emanauit statutum
eiusdem. idem quoque per omnia dominium habent duces super sibi subditos
homines.


the same in english.

of the authoritie of the emperour, and of his dukes. chap. 14.

[sidenote: the absolute and lordly dominion of the tartarian emperour ouer
his subiects] moreouer, the emperour of the tartars hath a wonderful
dominion ouer all his subiects. for no man dare abide in any place, vnles
he hath assigned him to be there. also he himselfe appointeth to his dukes
where they should inhabite. likewise the dukes assigne places vnto euery
millenarie, or conductor of a thousand souldiers, the millenaries vnto each
captaine of an 100. the captaines vnto euery corporall of ten. whatsoeuer
is giuen them in charge, whensoeuer, or whersoeuer, be it to fight or to
lose their liues, or howsoeuer it be, they obey without any gainsaying. for
if he demandeth any mans daughter, or sister being a virgine, they
presently deliuer her vnto him without all contradiction: yea, often times
he makes a collection of virgines throughout all the tartars dominions, and
those whom he meanes to keepe, he retaineth vnto himselfe, others he
bestoweth vpon his men. also, whatsoeuer messenger he sendeth, or
whithersoeuer his subiects must without delay hnde them horses and other
necessaries. in like sorte, from what countrey soeuer tribute payers, or
ambassadours come vnto him, they must haue horses, carriages, and expenses
allowed them. [sidenote: their barbarous inhumanitie towards ambassadours.]
notwithstanding ambassadours comming from other places do suffer great
misery, and are in much wante both of victuals, and of apparel: especially
when they come to any of the dukes, and there they are constrayned to make
some lingering abode. then ten men are allowed so little sustenance, that
scarcely two could liue thereof. likewise, if any iniuries be offered them,
they cannot without danger make complaint. many gifts also are demaunded of
them, both by dukes and others, which if they do not bestow, they are
basely esteemed, and set at nought. and hereupon, wee were of necessitie
enforced to bestowe in giftes a great part of those things which were giuen
vs by well disposed people, to defray our charges. to be short, all things
are so in the power and possession of the emperour, that no man dare say,
this is mine, or, this is my neighbours, but all, both goods, cattell and
men are his owne. concerning this matter also he published a statute of
late. the very same authority and iurisdiction doe the dukes in like sorte
exercise vpon their subiects.


de electione imperatoris occoday, et legatione ducis bathy. cap. 15.

[sidenote: occoday surrogatur patri. bathy eiusque expeditio.] mortuo, vt
supra dictum est, cyngischam conuenerunt duces, et elegerunt occoday,
filium eius imperatorem. qui habito consilio principum, diuisit exercitus.
misitque bathy, qui in secundo gradu attingebat eum, contra terram
altissodan et contra terram bisminorum, qui sarraceni erant, sed
loquebantur comanicum. qui terram illorum ingressus, cum eis pugnauit,
eosque sibi bello subiecit. [sidenote: barchin ciuitas.] quadam autem
ciuitas, nomine barchin, diu restitit eis. ciues enim in circuitu ciuitatis
foueas multas fecerant, propter quas non poterant a tartaris capi, donec
illas repleuissent. [sidenote: sarguit ciuitas.] ciues autem vrbis sarguit
hoc audientes, exierunt obuiam eis, sponte in manus eoram se tradentes.
vnde ciuitas eorum destructa non fuit, sed plures eorum occiderunt, et
alios transtulerunt, acceptisque spolijs, vrbem alijs hominibus
repleuerunt, et contra ciuitatem orna perrexerunt. [sidenote: orna
ciuitas.] hac erat nimium populosa et diuitijs copiosa. erant enim ibi
plures christiani, videlicet gasari et rutheni, et alani, et alij nec non
et sarraceni. eratque sarracenorum ciuitatis dominium. est etiam posita
super quendam magnum fluuium, et est quasi portus, habens forum maximum.
cumque tartari non possent eos aliter vincere, fluuium qui per vrbem
currebat, praciderunt, et illam cum rebus et hominibus submerserunt. quo
facto, contra russiam perrexerunt, et magnam stragem in ea fecerunt,
ciuitates et castra destruxerunt, et homines occiderunt. kiouiam, russia
metropolin, diu obsederunt, et tandem ceperunt, ac ciues interfecerunt.
[sidenote: vide mechouium lib. 1. cap. 3.] vnde quando per illam terram
ibamus, innumerabilia capita et ossa hominum mortuorum, iacentia super
campum, inueniebamus. fuerat enim vrbs valde magna et populosa, nunc quasi
ad nihilum est redacta: vix enim domus ibi remanserunt ducenta, quarum
etiam habitatores tenentur in maxime seruitute. porro de russia et de
comania tartari contra hungaros et polonos processerunt, ibique plures ex
ipsis interfecti fuerunt, et vt iam superius dictum est, si hungari
viriliter restitissent, tartari ab eis confusi recessissent. [sidenote:
morduani.] inde reuertentes in terram morduanorum, qui sunt pagani,
venerunt, eosque bello vicerunt. [sidenote: bulgaria magna.] inde contra
byleros, id est, contra bulgariam magnam profecti sunt, et ipsam omnino
destruxerunt. [sidenote: hungaria magna. parossita.] hinc ad aquilonem
adhuc contra bastarcos, id est hungariam magnam processerunt, et illos
etiam deuicerunt. hinc amplius ad aquilonem pergentes, ad parossitas
venerunt, qui paruos habentes stomachos et os paruum, non manducant sed
carnes decoquunt, quibus decoctis, se super ollam ponunt, et fumum
recipiunt, et de hoc solo reficiuntur, vel si aliquid manducant, hoc valde
modicum est. [sidenote: samogeta.] hinc et ad samogetas venerunt qui tantum
de venationibus viuunt, et tabernacula vestesque tantum habent de pellibus
bestiarum. [sidenote: monstra aquilinaria.] inde ad quandam terram super
oceanum peruenerunt, vbi monstra quadam inuenerunt, qua per omnia formam
humanam habebant, sed pedes bouinos, et caput quidem humanum, sed faciem vt
canis. duo verba loquebantur vt homines tertio latrabant vt canes. hinc
redierunt in comaniam, et vsque nunc ibi morantur ex eis quidam.

+ de his regionibus herbersteinius pag. 8. b. et 91. b. paret enim hodie
  vtraque moscuorum principi. item de bulgaria guaguinus pag. 106. b.


the same in english.

of the election of emperour occoday, and of the expedition of duke bathy.
  chap. 15.

[sidenote: occoday succeedeth his father. the expedition of bathy.] after
the death of chingis cham aforesayd, the dukes assembled themselues and
chose occoday his sonne to be their emperour. and he, entering into
consultation with his nobles, diuided his armies, and sent duke bathy his
nephew against the countrie of altisoldan, and against the people called
bisermini, who were saracens, but spake the language of comania. the
tartars inuading their countrey, fought with them and subdued them in
battel. [sidenote: the citie of barchin.] but a certeine citie called
barchin resisted them a long time. for the citizens had cast vp many
ditches and trenches about their citie, in regard whereof the tartars could
not take it till they had filled the said ditches. but the citizens of
sarguit hearing this, came foorth to meete them, yeelding themselues vnto
them of their owne accord. whereupon their citie was not destroyed, but
they slue manie of them and others they carried away captiue, and taking
spoyles, they filled the citie with other inhabitants, and so marched
foorth against the citie of orna. [sidenote: orna.] this towne was very
populous and exceeding rich. for there were many christians therein, as
namely gasarians, russians, and alanians, with others, and saracens also.
the gouernment of the citie was in the saracens hande. it standeth vpon a
mighty riuer, and is a kinde of porte towne, hauing a great marte exercised
therein. and when the tartars could not otherwise ouercome it, they turned
the said riuer, running through the citie, out of his chanell, and so
drowned the citie with the inhabitantes and their goods. which being done,
they set forward against russia, and made foule hauocke there, destroying
cities and castles and murthering the people. they laid siege a long while
vnto kiow the chiefe citie of russia, and at length they tooke it and slue
the citizens. whereupon, traueiling through that countrey, wee found an
innumerable multitude of dead mens skulles and bones lying vpon the earth.
for it was a very large and a populous citie, but it is nowe in a maner
brought to nothing for there doe scarce remaine 200 houses, the inhabitants
whereof are kept in extreame bondage. moreouer, out of russia and comania,
they proceeded forward against the hungarians, and the polonians and there
manie of them were slaine, as is aforesaid and had the hungarians manfully
withstood them, the tartars had beene confounded and driuen backe.
[sidenote: the morduans.] returning from thence, they inuaded the countrey
of the morduans being pagans, and conquered them in battell. [sidenote:
bulgaria magna.] then they marched against the people called byleri, or
bulgaria magna, and vtterly wasted the countrey. [sidenote: hungaria
magna.] from hence they proceeded towards the north against the people
called bastarci or hungaria magna, and conquered them also. [sidenote:
parossita.] and so going on further north, they came vnto the parossita,
who hauing little stomacks and small mouthes, eate not any thing at all,
but seething flesh they stand or sitte ouer the potte, and receiuing the
steame or smoke thereof, are therewith onely nourished, and if they eate
anie thing it is very little. [sidenote: samogeta.] from hence the came
they came to the samogeta, who liue onely vpon hunting, and vse to dwell in
tabernacles onely, and to weare garments made of beastes skinnes.
[sidenote: the north ocean.] from thence they proceeded vnto a countrey
lying vpon the ocean sea, where they found certaine monsters, who in all
things resembled the shape of men, sauing that their feete were like the
feete of an oxe, and they had in deede mens heads but dogges faces.
[sidenote: northerne monsters.] they spake, as it were, two words like men,
but at the third they barked like dogges. from hence they retired into
comania, and there some of them remaine vnto this day.


de legatione cyrpodan ducis. cap. 16.

[sidenote: expeditius cyrpodanis.] eo tempore misit occoday can cyrpodan
ducem cum exercitu ad meridiem contra kergis, qui et illos bello superauit.
hi homines sunt pagani, qui pilos in barba non habent. quorum consuetudo
talis est, vt cum alicuius pater moritur, pra dolore quasi vnam corrigiam
in signum lamenti ab aure vsque aurem de facie sua leuet. his autem
deuicus, dux cyrpodan contra armenios iuit ad meridiem cum suis. qui cum
transirent per deserta quadam, monstra inuenerunt effigiem humanam
habentia, qua non nisi vnum brachium cum manu in medio pectoris, et vnum
pedem habebant, et duo cum vno arco sagittabant, adeoque fortiter
currebant, quod equi eos inuestitare non poterant. currebant autem super
vnum pedem illum saltando, et cum essent fatigati, taliter eundo ibant
super manum et pedem, se tanquam in circulo reuoluendo. cumque sic etiam
fessi essent, iterum secundum priorem modum currebant. [sidenote:
cyclopedes.] hos isidorus cyclopedes appellat. et ex eis tartari non nullus
occiderunt. et sicut nobis a ruthenis clericis in curia dicebatur, qui
morantur cum imperatore pradicto plures ex eis nuncij venerunt in legatione
ad curiam imperatoris superius annotati, vt possent habere pacem cum illo.
[sidenote: armenia et georgia subacta.] inde procedentes venerunt in
armeniam, quam bello deuicerunt, et etiam georgia partem. alia vero pars
venit ad mandatum eorum, et singulis annis dederunt, et adhuc dant ei pro
tributo xx millia yperperarum. hinc ad terram soldam deurum potentis et
magni, processerunt, cum quo etiam pugnantes, ipsum deuicerunt. [sidenote:
soklanus halapia.] denique processerunt vlterius debellando ac vincendo
vsque ad terram soldani halapia, et nunc etiam terram obtinent, alias
quoque terras vltra illas proponentes impuguare: nec postea reuersi sunt in
terram suam vsque hodie. [sidenote: calipha baldacensis.] idemque exercitus
contra terram caliphi baldach perrexit, quam etiam sibi subdidit, et vt
cccc byzantios, exceptis baldekinis caterisque muneribus, ei quotidie pro
tributo daret, obtinuit. sed et quolibet anno mittunt nuncios ad caliphum,
vt ad eos veniat. qui cum tributo munera magna trasmittens, vt eum
supportent, rogat. ipse autem imperator tartarorum munera quidem accipit,
et nihilommus vt veniat, pro eo mittit.


the same in english.

of the expedition of duke cyrpodan. chap. 16.

[sidenote: kergis.] at the same time occoday can sent duke cyrpodan with an
armie against kergis, who also subdued them in battell. these men are
pagans, hauing no beardes at all. they haue a custome when any of their
fathers die, for griefe and in token of lamentation to drawe as it were, a
leather thong ouerthwart their faces, from one eare to the other. this
nation being conquered, duke cyrpodan marched with his forces southward
against the armenians. and trauailing through certain desert places, they
found monsters in the shape of men, which had each of them but one arme and
one hand growing out of the midst their breast, and but one foote. two of
them vsed to shoote in one bowe, and they ran so swiftly, that horses could
not ouertake them. they ran also vpon that one foote by hopping and
leaping, and being weary of such walking, they went vpon their hand and
their foote, turning themselues round, as it were in a circle. and being
wearie of so doing, they ran againe according to their wonted manner.
[sidenote: cyclopodes.] isidore calleth them cyclopedes. and as it was told
vs in court, by the clergie men of russia, who remaine with the foresayd
emperour, many ambassadours were sent from them vnto the emperours court,
to obtaine peace. [sidenote: armenia and georgia conquered.] from thence
they proceeded forth into armenia, which they conquered in battell, and
part also of georgia. and the other part is, vnder their iurisdiction,
paying as yet euery yeare vnto them for tribute, 20000. pieces of coyne
called yperpera. [sidenote: the soldan of aleppo his land.] from thence
they marched into the dominions of the puissant and mighty soldan called
deurum, whom also they vanquished in fight. and to be short, they went on
farther sacking and conquering, euen vnto the soldan of aleppo his
dominions, and now they haue subdued that land also, determining to inuade
other countries beyond it: neither returned they afterward into their owne
land vnto this day. [sidenote: the caliph of baldach.] likewise the same
armie marched forward against the caliph of baldach his countrey, which
they subdued also, and exacted as his handes the daylie tribute of 400.
byzantines, besides balkakines and other giftes. also euery yeare they send
messenters vnto the caliph mouing him to come vnto them. who sending back
great gifts together with his tribute beseecheth them to be fauourable vnto
him. howbeit the tartarian emperour receiueth al his gifts, and yet still
neuertheles sends for him, to haue him come.


qualiter tartari se habent in pralijs. cap. 17.

ordinauit chingischam tartaros per decanos et centenarios et millenarios.
[sidenote: tartarorum militaris disciplina.] decem quoque millenarijs
praponunt vnum, cunctoque nihilominus exercitui duos aut tres duces, ita
tamen vt ad vnum habeant respectum. cumque in bello contra aliquos
congrediuntur nisi communiter cedant, omnes qui fugiunt, occiduntur. et si
vnus aut duo vel plures ex decem audacter accedunt ad pugnam, alij vero ex
illo denario non sequuntur similiter occiduntur. sed etiam si vnus ex decem
vel plures capiuntur, socij eorum si non eos liberant, ipsi etiam
occiduntur. poro arma debent habere tallia. duos arcus vel vnum bonum ad
minus. [sidenote: armatura.] tresque pharetras sagittis plenas, et vnam
securim et funes ad machinas trahendas. diuites autem habent gladios in
fine acutos, ex vna parte tantum incidentes, et aliquantulum curuos. habent
et equos armatos, crura etiam tecta, galeas et loricas. verum loricas et
equorum cooperturas quidam habent de corio, super corpus artificiose
duplicato vel etiam triplicato. galea vero superius est de chalybe, vel de
ferro: sed illud, quod in circuitu protegit collum et gulam, est de corio.
quidam autem de ferro habent omnia supradicta, in hunc modum formata.
laminas multas tenues ad vnius digni latitudinem et palma longitudinem
faciunt, et in qualibet octo foramina paruula facientes, interius tres
corrgias strictas et fortes ponunt. sicque laminas, vnam alij quasi per
gradus ascendendo, supponunt. itaque laminas ad corrigias, tenuibus
corrigiolis per foramina pradicta immissis, ligant, et in superiori parte
corrigiolam vnam ex vtraque parte duplicatam cum alia corrigiola consuunt,
vt lamina simul bene firmiterque cohareant. hac faciunt tam ad cooperturas
equorum, quam ad armaturas hominum. adeoque faciunt ilia lucere, quod in
eis potest homo faciem suam videre. aliqui vero in collo ferri lancea vncum
habent, cum quo de sella, si possunt, hominem detrahant. sagittarum eorum
ferramenta sunt acutissima, ex vtraque parte quasi gladius biceps
incidentia, semperque iuxta pharetram portant limas ad acuendum sagittas.
habent vero scuta de viminibus, aut de virgulis facta. sed non credimus,
quod ea soleant portare, nisi id castra et ad custodiam imperatoris ac
principum, et hoc tantum de nocte. [sidenote: vsas bellorum.] in bellis
astutissimi sunt: quia per annos xlij. cum cateris gentibus dimicarunt.
[sidenote: mos tranandi flumina.] cum autem ad flumim peruenerunt, maiores
habent rotundum ac letie corium, in cuius summitate per circuitum ansas
erebras facientes funem imponunt ac stringunt, ita quod in circuitu quasi
ventrem efficiunt, quem vestibus ac rebus cateris replent, fortissimeque ad
inuicem comprimunt. in medio autem ponunt sellas et alias res duriores: ibi
quoque sedent homines. huiusmodi nauim ad equi caudam ligant, et hominem,
qui equum regat, pariter natare faciunt, vel habent aliquando duos remos,
cum quibus remigant. equo igitur in aquam impulso, omnes alij equi
sequuntur illum, et sic transeunt fluuium. pauperior autem quilibet vnam
bursam vel saccum de corio bene consutum habet, in quo res suas omnes
imponit, et in summitate fortiter ligatum, ad equi caudam suspendit, sicque
modo pradicto transit.


the same in english.

how the tartars behaue themselues in warre. chap. 17.

[sidenote: the military discipline of the tartars] chingis cham diuided his
tartars by captaines of ten, captaines of an 100, and captaines of a 1000.
and ouer ten millenaries or captains of a 1000, he placed, as it were, one
colonel, and yet notwithstanding ouer one whole army he authorised two or
three dukes, but yet so that all should haue especiall regart vnto one of
the said dukes. and when they ioine battel against any other nation, vnles
they do all with one consent giue backe, euery man that flies is put to
death. and if one or two, or more of ten proceed manfully to the battel,
but the residue of those ten draw backe and follow not the company, they
are in like manner slaine. also, if one among ten or more bee taken, their
fellowes, if they rescue them not, are punished with death. [sidenote:
their weapons.] moreouer they are enioined to haue these weapons following.
two long bowes or one good one at the least, three quiuers full of arrowes,
and one axe, and ropes to draw engines withal. but the richer sort haue
single edged swords, with sharpe points, and somewhat crooked. they haue
also armed horses with their shoulders and breasts defenced, they haue
helmets and brigandines. some of them haue iackes, and caparisons for their
horses made of leather artificially doubled or trebled vpon their bodies.
the vpper part of their helmet is of iron or steele, but that part which
compasseth about the necke and the throate is of leather. howbeit some of
them haue of the foresaide furniture of iron trimed in maner following.
they beate out many thinne plates a finger broad and a handful long, and
making in euery one of them eight littel holes, they put thereunto three
strong and straight leather thongs. so they bind the plates one to another,
as it were, ascending by degrees. then they tie the plates vnto the said
thongs with other small and slender thongs drawen through the holes
aforesaid, and in the vppper part, on each side therof, they fasten one
small doubled thong vnto another, that the plates may firmely be knit
together. these they make as well for their horses caparisons, as for the
armour of their men: and they skowre them so bright that a man may behold
his face in them. some of them vpon the necke of their launce haue an
hooke, wherewithall they attempt to pull men out of their saddles. the
heads of their arrowes are exceedingly sharpe cutting both wayes like a two
edged sworde, and they alwaies carie a file in their quiuers to whet their
arrowheads. they haue targets made of wickers, or of small reddes. howbeit
they doe not (as we suppose) accustome to carrie them, but onely about the
tents or in the emperours or dukes guards, and that only in the night
season. [sidenote: their experience and cunning in warres.] they are most
politique in warres, hauing bene exercised therein with other nations for
the of these 42. yeres. [sidenote: their maner of passing ouer riuers.]
when they come at any riuers the chiefe men of the company haue a round and
light piece of leather, about the borders whereof making many loopes, they
put a rope into them to draw it together like a purse, and so bring it into
the round forme of a ball, which leather they fill with their garments and
other necessities trussing it vp most strongly. but vpon the midst of the
vpper parte thereof, they lay their saddles and other hard things there,
also doe the men themselues sit. this their boate they tye vnto an horse
tayle, causing a man to swimme before, and to guide ouer the horse, or
sometime they haue two oares to row themselues ouer. the first horse
therefore being driuen into the water all the other horses of the company
followe him, and so they passe through the riuer. but the poorer sorte of
common souldiers haue euery man his leather bag or sachell well sown
together, wherin he packs vp all his trinkets, and strongly trussing it vp
hangs it at his horses tayle, and so passeth ouer in maner aforesaid.


qualiter resistendum sit eis. cap 18

nullam astimo prouinciam esse qua per se possit eis resistere: quia de omni
terra potestatis sua solent homines ad bellum congregare. et siquidem
vicina prouincia non vult eis opem ferre, quam impugnant, delentes illum
cum hominibus, quos ex illa capiunt, contra aliam pugnant. [sidenote:
[greek: harainesis] de bello contra tartaros gerendo.] et illos quidem in
acie primos ponunt et si male pugnant, ipsos occidunt. itaque si christiani
eis resistere volunt oportet quod principes ac rectores terrarum in vnum
conueniant, ac de communi consilio eis resistant habeantque pugnatores
arcus fortes et balistais, quas multum timent sagittasque sufficientes
dolabrum quoque de bono ferro, vel securim cum manubrio longo. [sidenote:
ferri temperamentum.] ferramenta vero sagittarum more tartarorum, quando
sunt calida, temperare debent in aqua, cum sale mixta, vt fortia sint ad
penetrandum illorum arma. gladios etiam et lanceas cum vncis habeant, qui
volunt, ad detrahendum illos de sella, de qua facillime cadunt. habeant et
galeas et arma catera, ad protegendum corpus et equum ab armis et saggitis
eorum, et si qui non ita sunt armati, debent more illorum post alios ire,
et contra ipsos arcubus vel balistis traijcere. et sicut dictum est supra
de tartaris, debent acies suas ordinare, ac legem pugnantibus imponere.
quicunque conuersus fuerit ad pradam ante victoriam maximam debet poenam
subire: talis enim apud illos occiditur absque miseratione. locus ad
pralium, si fieri potest, eligendus est planus, vt vndique possint videre,
nec omnes debent in vnum conuenire, sed acies multas et diuisas, nec tamen
nimis distantes ab inuicem facere. contra illos qui primo veniunt, debent
vnam aciem mittere, et alia parata sit ad iuuandum illam opportuno tempore.
habeant et speculatores ex omni parte, qui videant, quando veniunt acies
catere. nam ideo semper debent aciem contra aciem, vt ei occurrant,
mittere, quoniam illi semper nituntur aduersarios in medio concludere. hoc
autem acies caueant, ne si etiam illi fugere videantur, diu post illos
currant, ne forte, sicut facere solent, ipsos ad paratas insidias trahent:
quia plus fraudulentia quam fortitudine pugnant. et iterum ne fatigentur
equi eorum: quia nostri multitudinem non habent equorum. tartari vero quos
equitant die vna, non ascendunt tribus diebus, vel quatuor postea. pratera
si cedunt tartari, non ideo debent nostri recedere, vel ab inuicem
separari: quoniam hoc simulando faciunt, vt exercitus diuidatur, et sic ad
terra destructionem libere ingrediantur. caterum duces nostri die noctuque
facere debent exercitum custodiri: nec iacere spoliati, sed semper ad
pugnam parati: quia tartari quasi damones semper vigilant, excogitantes
artem nocendi. porro si aliqui tartarorum in bello de suis equis
proijciuntur, statim capiendi sunt, quia quando sunt in terra fortiter
sagittant, et equos hominesque vulnerant.


the same in english.

howe they may be resisted. chap. 18.

i deeme not any one kingdome or prouince able to resist them because they
vse to take vp souldiers out of euery countrey of their dominions. and if
so be the neighbour prouince which they inuade, wil not aide them, vtterly
wasting it, with the inhabitants therof, whom they take from thence with
them, they proceed on to fight against another countrey. and placing their
captiues in the forefront of the battell, if they fight not couragiously,
they put them to the sworde. [sidenote: counsel how to wage warre against
the tartar.] wherefore, if christians would withstande them, it is
expediennt, that the prouinces and gouernours of countreies should agree in
one, and so by common counsell, should giue them resistance. their
souldiers also must be furnished with strong hand-bowes and cros-bowes,
which they greatly dread, and with sufficient arrowes, with maces also of
good iron, or an axe with a long handle or staffe. [sidenote: a notable
temper of iron or steele.] when they make their arrow heads they must
(according to the tartars custome) dip them red-hot into water mingled with
salte, that they may be strong to pierce the enemies armour. they that wil
may haue swords also and lances with hooks at the ends, to pull them from
their saddles, out of which they are easilie remoued. they must haue
helmets likewise and other armour to defend themselues and their horses
from the tartars weapons and arrowes, and they that are vnarmed, must
(according to the tartars custome) march behinde their fellowes, and
discharge at the enemie with long bowes and cros-bowes. and (as it is aboue
said of the tartars) they must orderly dispose their bandes and troupes,
and ordeine lawes for their souldiers. whosoeuer runneth to the pray or
spoyle, before the victorie be achieued, must vndergoe a most seuere
punishment. for such a fellow is put to death among the tartars without all
pitie or mercie. the place of battel must be chosen, if it be possible, in
a plaine fielde, where they may see round about, neither must all be in one
company, but in manie and seuerall bandes, not very farre distant one from
another. they which giue the first encounter must send one band before, and
must haue another in a readynesse to relieue and second the former in time
conuenient. they must haue spies also on euery side to giue them notice
when the rest of the enemies bandes approch. for therefore ought they
alwayes to send forth band against band and troupe against troupe, because
the tartar euer practiseth to gette his enemie in the midst and so to
enuiron him. let our bands take this caveat also, if the enemie retire, not
to make any long pursuit after him, lest peraduenture (according to his
custome) he might draw them into some secret ambush: for the tartar fights
more by policie than by maine force. those horses which the tartars vse one
day, they ride not vpon three or foure dayes after. moreouer, if the
tartars draw homeward, our men must not therefore depart and casseir their
bandes, or separate themselues asunder: because they doe this vpon policie,
namely to haue our armie diuided, that they may more securely inuade and
waste the countrey. and in very deede, our captaines ought both day and
night to keepe their armie in a readines: and not to lie out of their
armour, but at all assayes, to bee prouided for battell. for the tartars
like deuils are alwaies watching and deuising howe to practise mischiefe.
furthermore, if in battell any of the tartars be cast off their horse
backes, they must presently bee layd holde on and taken, for being on foote
they shoote strongly, wounding and killing both horses and men.


de itinere fratris iohannis de plano carpini vsque ad primam custodiam
  tartarorum. cap. 19.

nos igitur ex mandato sedis apostolica cum iremus ad orientis nationes,
elegimus prius ad tartaros proficisci: quia timebamus, ne per illos in
proximo ecclesia dei periculum immineret. [sidenote: itinarium iohann. et
sociorum legatorum.] itaque pergentes, ad regem boemorum peruenimus: qui
cum esset nobis familiaris, consuluit, vt per poloniam et russiam iter
ageremus. habebat enim consanguineos in polinia, quorum auxilo russiam
intrare possemus. [sidenote: boleslaus dux silesia.] datisque literis et
bono conductu, fecit et expensas nobis dari per curias et ciuitates eius,
quo vsque ad ducem silesia bolezlaum, nepotem eius, veniremus, qui etiam
erat nobis familiaris et notus. hinc et ipse nobis similiter fecit, donec
veniremus ad conradum, ducem [marginal note: mazouia.] lautiscia, ad quem
tunc, dei gratia nobis fauente, venerat dominus wasilico, dux russia, a quo
etiam plenius de facto audiuimus tartarorum: quia nuncios illuc miserat,
qui iam redierant ad ipsum. audito autem, quod opporteret nos illis munera
dare, quasdam pelles castorum et aliorum animalium fecimus emi, de hoc,
quod datum nobis fuerat in eleemosynam ad subsidium via. quod agnoscentes
dux conradus et [marginal note: grimislaua vt mechouius lib. 1. cap. 9.]
ducissa cracouia, et episcopus et quidam milites, plures etiam nobis
dederunt huiusmodi pelles. denique dux wasilico a duce cracouia, et
episcopo atque baronibus pro nobis attente rogatus, secum nos in terram
suam duxit, et vt aliquantulum quiesceremus aliquot diebus nos in expensis
suis detinuit. [sidenote: litera papa ad russos.] et cum rogatus a nobis,
fecisset episcopos suos venire, legimus eis literas domini papa, monentis
eos, ad sancta matris ecclesia vnitatem redire. ad idem quoque nos ipsi
monuimus eos, et induximus, quantum potuimus, tam ducem quam episcopos et
alios. [sidenote: daniel, frater basilij.] sed quia dux daniel, frater
wasiliconis pradicti, prasens non erat, quoniam ad baty profectus erat, non
potuerunt eo tempore finaliter respondere. post hac dux wasilico transmisit
nos vsque in kiouiam metropolin russia, cum seruiente vno. [sidenote:
lituani.] ibamus tamen in periculo capitis semper propter lituanos, qui
sape faciebant insultum super terram russia et in illis maxime locis, per
quos debebamus transire. at per pradictum seruientem eramus securi a
ruthenis, quorum etiam maxima pars occisa vel captiuata erat a tartaris.
porro in danilone vsque ad mortem tunc infirmati fuimus. nihilominus tamen
in vehiculo per niuem et frigus magnum trahi nos fecimus. cum ergo kiouiam
peruenimus, habuimus de via nostra consilium cum millenario ac cateris
ibidem nobilibus. [sidenote: pabulum equorum tartario.] qui responderunt
nobis, quod si duceremus equos illos, quos tunc habebamus, ad tortaros, cum
essent magna niues, morerentur omnes: qui nescirent herbam fodere sub niue,
sicut equi faciunt tartarorum, nec inueniri posset aliquod pro eis ad
manducandum, cum tartari nec stramina nec foenum habeant, nec pabulum.
itaque decreuimus eos illic dimittere cum duobus pueris, deputatis eorum
custodia. ideoque nos oportuit millenario dare munera, vt ipsum haberemus
propitium, ad dandum nobis equos subductitios et conductum. secundo igitur
die post festum purificationis cepto itinere, venimus ad villam canoua, qua
sub tartaris erat immediate. [sidenote: micheas [greek: pankakos].] cuius
prafectus nobis dedit equos et conductum vsque ad aliam, in qua reperimus
prafectum micheam omni malitia plenum. qui tamen acceptis a nobis muneribus
secundum velle suum, duxit nos vsque ad primam custodiam tartarorum.


the same in english.

of the iourney of frier [marginal note: iohannes de plano carpini.] iohn
  vnto the first guard of the tartars. chap. 19.

[sidenote: the iourney of frier iohn and his fellow legates.] we therefore
by the commaundement of the sea apostolique setting foorth towards the
nations of the east, chose first to trauel vnto the tartars, because we
feared that there might be great danger imminent vpon the church of god
next vnto them, by their inuasions. [sidenote: boleslaus duke of silesia.]
proceeding on therefore, we came to the king of bohemia, who being of our
familiar acquaintance, aduised vs to take our iourney through polonia and
russia. for he had kinsfolkes in polonia, by whose assistance, we might
enter into russia. hauing giuen vs his letters, hee caused our charges also
to be defrayed, in all his chiefe houses and cities, till we came vnto his
nephew boleslaus duke of silesia, who also was familiar and well knowen
vnto vs. the like fauour he shewed vs also, till wee came vnto conradus
duke of [marginal note: mazouia.] lautiscia, vnto whome then (by gods
especiall fauour towards vs) lord wasilico duke of russia was come, from
whose mouth we heard more at large concerning the deedes of the tartars:
for he had sent ambassadours thither, who were returned backe vnto him.
wherefore, it being giuen vs to vnderstand, that we must bestow giftes vpon
them, we caused certaine skinnes of beuers and other beastes to be bought
with part of that money, which was giuen vpon almes to succour vs by the
way. which thing duke conradus and the [marginal note: grimslaua.] duches
of cracow, and a bishop, and certaine souldiers being aduertised of, gaue
vs likewise more of the same skins. and to be short, duke wasilico being
earnestly requested by the duke of cracow, and by the bishop and barons, on
our behalfe, conducted vs with him, vnto his owne land, and there for
certaine daies, enterteined vs at his owne charges, to the ende that we
might refresh ourselues a while. and when, being requested by vs, he had
caused his bishops to resort vnto him, we reade before them the popes
letters, admonishing them to returne vnto the vnitie of the church. to the
same purpose also, we our selues admonished them, and to our abilitie,
induced as well the duke as the bishops and others thereunto. [sidenote:
daniel brother vnto wasilico.] howbeit because duke daniel the brother of
wasilico aforesaid (hauing as then taken his iourney vnto baty) was absent,
they could not at that time, make a finall answere. after these things duke
wasilico sent vs forward with one of his seruants as farre as kiow the
chiefe citie of russia. [sidenote: the lithuanians.] howbeit we went
alwayes in danger of our liues by reason of the lithuanians, who did often
inuade the borders of russia, euen in those verie places by which we were
to passe. but in regard of the foresayd seruant, wee were out of the
russians daunger, the greatest part of whome were either slaine, or caried
into captiuitie by the tartars. moreouer, at danilon wee were feeble euen
vnto the death. (notwithstanding wee caused our selues to bee carried in a
waggon through the snowe and extreme colde) and being come vnto kiow, wee
consulted with the millenary, and other noble men there concerning our
iourney. [sidenote: the fodder of the tartarian horses.] they told vs, that
if wee carried those horses, which wee then had, vnto the tartars, great
store of snowe lying vpon the ground, they would all dye: because they knew
not how to digge vp the grass vnder the snow, as the tartarian horses doe,
neither could there bee ought found for them to eate, the tartars hauing
neither hay nor strawe, nor any other fodder. we determined therefore to
leaue them behind at kiow with two seruants appointed to keepe them. and
wee were constrayned to bestow gifts vpon the millenary, that we might
obtaine his fauour to allowe vs poste horses and a guide. wherefore
beginning our iourney the second daye after the feast of the purification,
wee arriued at the towne of canow, which was immediately vnder the dominion
of the tartars. [sidenote: michaas the malicious] the gouernour whereof
allowed vs horses and a guide vnto another towne, wherein wee found one
michaas to be gouernour, a man full of all malice and despight. who
notwithstanding, hauing receiued giftes at our handes, according to his
maner conducted vs to the first guarde of the tartars.


qualiter primo cum socijs suis receptus est a tartaris. cap. 20.

cum ergo in prima sexta feria post diem cinerum, sole ad occasum tendente,
hospitaremur, tartari super nos armati horribiliter irruerunt, quarentes
cuiusmodi homines essemus: cumque respondissemus, quod domini papa nuncij
essemus, quibusdam cibarijs a nobis acceptis, continuo discesserunt. porro
mane facto, cum surgentes aliquantulum processissemus, maiores illorum, qui
erant in custodia, nobis occurrerunt, interrogantes, cur ad eos veniremus?
et quid negotij haberemus? [sidenote: papa christianorum pater et dominus.]
quibus respondimus, domini papa nuncij sumus, qui christianorum pater est
ac dominus. hic nos idcirco tam ad regem quam ad principes, omnesque
tartaros, mittit, quia placet ei, quod omnes christiani tartarorum sint
amici, et pacem habeant cum ipsis. [sidenote: legationibus mandata.]
desiderat insuper, vt apuud deum in coelo sint magni, et idcirco monet eos
tam per nos quam per literas suas, vt efficiantur christiani, fidemque
recipiant domini nostri iesu christi, quia non possunt aliter saluari.
mandat praterea, quod miratur de tanta occisione hominum, et maxime
christianorum, ac potissime hungarorum montanorum, et polonorum, qui sunt
ei subiecti, facta per tartaros, cum in nullo lasissent, aut ladere
attentassent eos. et quia dominus deus grauiter est super hoc offensus,
monet eos vt a talibus de catero caueant, et de commissis poenitentiam
agant. super his etiam rogat, vt ei rescribant, quid facere velint de
catero, et qua sit eorum intentio. [sidenote: corrensa.] quibus auditis, et
intellectis, dixerunt tartari, se velle equos nobis subductitios vsque ad
corrensam et ducatum prabere. statimque munera petierunt, et a nobis
acceperunt. equis igitur acceptis, de quibus descenderunt ipsi, cum eorum
ducatu ad corrensam arripuimus iter eundi. ipsi tamen velociter equitantes,
nuncium vnum pramiserunt ad prafatum ducem cum his verbis, qua dixeramus
eisdem. [sidenote: dux limitis occidentalis.] est autem dux iste dominus
omnium, qui positi sunt in custodia contra omnes occidentis populos, ne
forte subito et improuiso irruant aliqui super illos. et iste dicitur
habere sexaginta millia hominum armatorum sub se.


the same in english.

how he and his company were at the first receiued of the tartars. chap. 20.

wherefore, the first saturday next after ashwednesday, hauing about the
sunnes going downe, taken vp our place of rest, the armed tartars came
rushing vpon vs in vnciuil and horrible maner, being very inquisitiue of vs
what maner of persons, or of what condition we were: and when we had
answered them that we were the popes legates, receiuing some victuals at
our handes, they immediately departed. moreouer in the morning rising and
proceeding on our iourney, the chiefe of them which were in the guard met
with vs, demaunding why, or for what intent and purpose we came thither,
and what business we had with them: vnto whom we answered, we are the
legates of our lord the pope, who is the father and lord of the christians.
[sidenote: the content of the legacie.] he hath sent vs as well vnto your
emperour, as to your princes, and all other tartars for this purpose,
because it is his pleasure, that all christians should be in league with
the tartars, and should haue peace with them. it is his desire also that
they should become great or in fauour with god in heauen, therfore he
admonisheth them aswel by vs, as by his own letters, to become christians,
and to embrace the faith of our lord iesu christ, because they could not
otherwise be saued. moreouer, he giues them to vndersand, that he much
marueileth at their monstrous slaughters and massacres of mankind, and
especially of christians, but most of al of hungarians, mountaineirs, and
polonians, being al his subiects, hauing not iniuried them in ought, nor
attempted to doe them iniurie. and because the lord god is grieuously
offended thereat, he aduiseth them from henceforth to beware of such
dealing, and to repent them of that which they had done. he requesteth
also, that they would write an answere vnto him, what they purpose to doe
hereafter, and what their intention is. all which things being heard and
vnderstood, the tartars sayd that they would appoint vs poste horses and a
guide vnto corrensa. and immediately demanding gifts at our hands, they
obtained them. [sidenote: corrensa.] then receiuing the same horses, from
which they dismounted, together with a guide wee tooke our iourney into
corrensa. [sidenote: the duke of the western marches.] but they riding a
swift pace, sent a messenger before vnto the sayd duke to signifie the
message, which we had deliuered vnto them. this duke is gouernour of all of
them, which lie in guard against the nations of the west, least some enemy
might on the sudden and at vnawares breake in vpen them. and hee is said to
haue 60000. men vnder him.


qualiter recepti sunt apud corrensam. cap. 21.

[sidenote: mos salutandi tartaricos proceres.] cum ergo peruenissemus an
eius curiam, fecit nobis longe a se poni stationem, et misit ad nos
procuratores suos, vt quarent a nobis, cum quo ei vellemus inclinare id
est, qua ei munera inclinando vellemus offerre. quibus respondimus, quod
dominus papa non mittebat aliqua munera; quia non erat certus, quod ad
illos peruenire possemus, et insuper veneramus per loca valde periculosa.
veruntamen in quantum de his, qua habebamus ex gratia dei et domini papa ad
victum nostrum, sicut poterimus, honorabimus ipsum. acceptisque muneribus
duxerunt nos ad ordam siue tentorium ipsius, et instructi fuimus, vt ante
ostium stationis ter cum sinistro genu inclinaremus, et caueremus attente
ne pedem super limen ostij poneremus. et postquam intrauimus, opportunt nos
coram duce omnibusque maioribus, qui ad hoc erant vocari, dicere flexis
genibus ea, qua dixeramus superius. literas etiam dom. papa obtulimus: sed
interpres, quem de kyouia, dato pretio, duxeramus, non erat sufficiens ad
interpretandum, nec aliquis alius habebatur idoneus. [sidenote: bathy
eiusque potentia.] hinc equi nobis dati sunt, et tres tartari qui nos
ducerent festinanter ad ducem bathy. ipse est apud eos potentior excepto
imperatore, cui tenentur pra cunctis principibus obedire. itaque iter
arripuimus secunda feria post primam dominicam [marginal note:
quadragesime.] xl. et equitando, quantum equi trotare poterant, quoniam
habebamus equos recentes fere ter aut quater omni die, properabamus de mane
vsque ad noctem, imo etiam de nocte sapissime, nec tamen ante quartam
feriam maioris hebdomada potuimus ad ipsum peruenire. [sidenote: comania.]
ibamus autem per terram comanorum qua tota est plana, et flumina quatuor
habet magna. primuim appellatur [marginal note: veteribus borysthenes.]
neper, iuxta quod ex parte russia ambulabat correnza et montij, qui maior
est ille ex altera parte per campestria. secundum appellatur [marginal
note: tanais] don, super quod ambulat quidam princeps habens in coniugio
sororem baty, qui vocatur tirbor. tertium dicitur [marginal note: rha.]
volga, quod est magnum valde super quod incecdit bathy. quartum nominatur
[marginal note: rhymnus.] iaec, super quod duo millenarij vadunt, vnus ex
parte illuminis vna, et alter ex altera. hi omnes in hyeme ad mare
descendunt, et in astate super ripam corundem fluminum ad montes ascendunt.
hoc est mare magnum, de quo brachium saneti georgij exit, quod in
constantinopolin vadit. [sidenote: pontus euxinas.] hac autem flumina sunt
piscibus valde plena, maxime volga, intrantque mare gracia, quod dicitur
magnum mare. [sidenote: volga non intrat.] super nepre autem multis diebus
iuimus per glaciem. super littora quoque maris gracia satis periculose per
glaciem iuimus in pluribus locis multis diebus. congelantur enim circa
littora vnda ad tres leugas inferius. prius autem quam ad bathy
perueniremus, duo ex nostris tartaris pracesserunt, ad indicandum ei omnia
verba qua apud corrensam dixeramus.


the same in english.

how they were receiued at the court of corrensa. chap. 21.

[sidenote: the maner of saluting the tartarian princes.] being come
therefore vnto his court, hee caused our tent to be placed farre from him,
and sent his agents to demaund of vs with what we would incline vnto him,
that is to say, what giftes we would offer, in doing our obeisance vnto
him. vnto whome wee answered, that our lord the pope had not sent any
giftes at all, because he was not certaine that wee should euer bee able to
come at them: for we passed through most dangerous places. notwithstanding,
to our abilitie, we will honour him with some part of those things which
haue bene, by the goodnes of god and the fauour of the pope, bestowed vpon
vs for our sustenance. hauing receiued our gifts, they conducted vs vnto
the orda or tent of the duke, and we were instructed to bow thrise with our
left knee before the doore of the tente, and in any case to beware, lest
wee set our foote vpon the threshold of the sayd doore. and that after we
were entred, wee should rehearse before the duke and all his nobles, the
same wordes which wee had before sayd, kneeling vpon our knees. then
presented wee the letters of our lord the pope: but our interpreter whome
we had hired and brought with vs from kiow was not sufficiently able to
interpret them, neither was there any other esteemed to bee meete for the
same purpose. here certaine poste horses and three tartars were appoynted
for vs to conduct vs from hence with al speede vnto duke bathy. [sidenote:
duke bathy and his power] this bathy is the mightiest prince among them
except the emperour, and they are bound to obey him before all other
princes. we began our iourney towards his court the first tuesday in lent,
and riding as fast as our horses could trot (for we had fresh horses almost
thrise or foure times a day) we posted from morning till night, yea very
often in the night season also, and yet could we not come at him before
maundie thursday. all this iourney we went through the land of comania,
which is al plaine ground, and hath foure mighty riuers running through it:
[marginal note: boristhenes] neper, on the side whereof towards russia,
duke corrensa and montij marched vp and downe, which montij on the other
side vpon the plaines is greater then he. the second is called [marginal
note: tanais.] don, vpon the banke whereof marcheth a certain prince hauing
in marriage the sister of bathy, his name is tirbon. the third is called
[marginal note: rha.] volga, which is an exceeding great riuer, vpon the
bankes whereof duke bathy marcheth. the fourth is called [marginal note:
rhymnus.] iaec, vpon which two millenaries doe march, on each side of the
riuer one. all these, in the winter time, descend down to the sea, and in
summer ascend backe by the bankes of the said riuers vp to the mountains.
the sea last named is the [marginal note: pontes euxima. he is deceiued,
for albeit neper and don run into mare maior: yet volga and iaec flowe into
the caspian sea.] great sea, out of which the arme of s. george proceedeth,
which runneth by constantinople. these riuers do abound with plenty of
fishes, but especially volga, and they exonerate themselues into the
grecian sea, which is called mare maior. ouer neper we went many daies vpon
the ice. along the shore also of the grecian sea we went very dangerously
vpon the ice in sundry places, and that for many daies together. for about
the shore the waters are frozen three leagues into the sea. but before we
came into bathy, two of our tartars rode afore, to giue him intelligence of
all the sayings which we had vttered in the presence of corrensa.


qualiter recepti sunt apud bathy magnum principem. cap. 22.

porro cum in finibus terra comanorum ad bathy perueniremus, bene positi
fuimus per vnam leucam a stationibus eius. [sidenote: ceremonia per duos
ignes transeundi.] cumque duci debuimus ad curiam ipsius, dictum fuit
nobis, quod inter duos ignes transire deberemus. nos autem hoc nulla
ratione facere volebamus. at illi dixerunt nobis: ite secure quia pro nulla
causa volumus hoc facere, nisi tantum, vt si vos aliquid malum cogitatis
domino nostro, vel portatis venenum, ignis auferat omne malum quibus
respondemus: quod propter hoc, ne de tali re suspectos redderemus nos,
transiremus. [sidenote: eldegay.] cum igitur ad ordam peruenissemus,
interrogati a procuratore ipsius eldegay, cum quo inclinare vellemus? idem
quod prius apud corrensam respondimus, datisque muneribus et acceptis,
auditis etiam itineris causis, introduxerunt nos in stationem principis,
prius facta inclinatione, et audita de limine non calcando, sicut prius,
admonitione. [sidenote: bathy audit legatos.] ingressi autem flexis
genibus, verba nostra proposuimus, deinde literas obtulimus, et vt nobis
darentur interpretes ad transferendum eas, rogauimus. qui etiam in die
parasceue dati fuerunt nobis, et eas in litera ruthenica, sarracenica, et
in tartarica diligenter cum ipsis transtulimus. hac interpretatio bathy
prasentata fuit; quam et legit, et attente notauit. tandem ad nostram
stationem reducti fuimus, sed nulla cibaria nobis dederunt, nisi semel
aliquantulum millij in vna scutella, scilicet in prima nocte quando
venimus. [sidenote: gerit se regifice.] iste bathy magnifice se gerit,
habens ostianos et omnes officiales ad modum imperatoris, et sedet in
eminenti loco velut in throno cum vna de vxoribus suis. alij vero tam
fratres sui et filij, quam alij maiores inferius sedent in medio super
bancum, et homines cateri post eos in terra deorsum, sed viri a dextris, et
foemina a sinistris. tentoria quoque de panno lineo habet pulchra et magna
satis, qua fuerunt hungaria regis. nec aliquis ad eius tentorium audet
accedere prater familiam, nisi vocatus, quantumcunque sit potens et magnus,
nisi forte sciatur, quod sit voluntas ipsius. nos etiam dicta causa sedimus
a sinistris: sic etenim et omnes nuncij faciunt in eundo: sed in redeundo
ab imperatore, semper ponebamur a dextris. [sidenote: eiusdem bibendi ad
symphonia cantum mos.] in medio ponitur mensa eius prope ostium stationis,
super quam apponitur potus in aureis et argenteis vasis. nec vnquam bibit
bathy, vel aliquis tartarorum princeps, maxime quando in publico sunt, nisi
cantetur ei vel cytharizetur. et cum equitat, semper portatur solinum vel
tentoriolum super caput eius in hasta. [sidenote: authoritas.] sicque
faciunt cuncti maiores principes tartarorum, et etiam vxores eorum. idem
vero bathy satis est hominibus suis benignus, valde tamen ab eis timetur,
et in pugna est crudelisimus, sagax est multum et astutissimus in bello:
quia iam pugnauit tempore longo.


the same in english.

how we were receiued at the court of the great prince bathy. chap. 22.

moreouer, when we came vnto bathy in the land of comania, we were seated a
good league distant from his tabernacles. [sidenote: a ceremony of passing
betweene two fires.] and when we should be conducted vnto his court, it was
told vs that we must passe between two fires. but we would by no means be
induced thereunto. howbeit, they said vnto vs: you may passe through
without al danger: for we would haue you to doe it for none other cause,
but only that if you intend any mischiefe against our lord, or bring any
poyson with you, fire may take away all euill. vnto whom we answered, that
to the end we might cleare ourselues from all suspition of any such matter,
we were contented to passe through. [sidenote: eldegay.] when therefore we
were come vnto the orda, being demanded by his agent eldegay with what
present or gift we would do our obeisance? wee gaue the same answere which
we did at the court of corrensa. the gifts being giuen and receiued, the
causes of our iourney also being heard, they brought vs into the tabernacle
of the prince, first bowing ourselues at the doore, and being admonished,
as before, not to tread vpon the threshold. [sidenote: bathy heareth the
legates.] and being entred, we spake vnto him kneeling vpon our knees, and
deliuered him our letters, and requested him to haue interpreters to
translate them. who accordingly on good friday were sent vnto vs, and we
together with them, diligently translated our sayd letters into the
russian, tartarian, and saracen languages. this interpretation was
presented vnto bathy, which he read, and attentiuely noted. at length wee
were conducted home againe vnto our owne lodging, howbeit no victuals were
giuen vnto vs, except it were once a litle millet in a dich, the first
night of our comming. [sidenote: he behaues himselfe like a king.] this
bathy caries himselfe very stately and magnificently, hauing porters and
all officers after the maner of the emperour, and sittes in a lofty seate
or throne together with one of his wiues. the rest, namely, as well his
brethren and sonnes, as other great personages sit vnderneath him in the
midst vpon a bench, and others sit down vpon the ground, behinde him, but
the men on the right hand and the women on the left. he hath very faire and
large tentes of linnen cloth also, which were once the kings of hungaria.
neither dare any man come into his tent (besides them of his owne family)
vnles he be called, be he neuer so mighty and great, except perhaps it be
knowen that it is his pleasure. wee also, for the same cause, sate on the
left hand; for so doe all ambassadors in going: but in returning from the
emperour, we were alwaies placed on the right hand. in the middest stands
his table, neare vnto the doore of the tent, vpon the which there is drinke
filled in golden and siluer vessels. [sidenote: their custome of drinking
at the sound of musicke.] neither doth bathy at any time drinke, nor any
other of the tartarian princes, especially being in a publique place, but
they haue singing and minstrilsie before them. and alwaies, when hee rides,
there is a canopie or small tent caried ouer his head vpon the point of a
iaueline. and so doe all the great princes of the tartars, and their wiues
also. the sayd bathy is courteous enough vnto his owne men, and yet is hee
had in great awe by them: he is most cruel in fight: he is exceedingly
prudent and politique in warre, because he hath now continued a long time
in martiall affaires.


qualiter recedentes a bathy per terram comanorum et kangittarum
  transierunt. cap. 23.

[sidenote: legati iubentur ad cuyme imperat. pergere.] in die porro
sabbathi sancti ad stationem fuimus vocati, et exiuit ad nos procurator
bathy pradictus, dicens ex parte ipsius, quod ad imperatorem cuyne in
terram ipsorum iremus, retentis quibusdam ex nostris sub hac specie, quod
vellent eos remittere ad dominum papam, quibus et literas dedimus de
omnibus factis nostris, quas deferrent eidem. sed cum rediissent vsque ad
montij ducem supra dictum, ibi retenti fuerunt vsque ad reditum nostrum.
nos autem in die pascha officio dicto, et facta comestione qualicunque cum
duobus tartaris, qui nobis apud corrensam fuerant assignati, cum multis
lacrymis recessimus, nescientes vtrum ad mortem vel vitam pergeremus.
eramus tamen ita infirmi corpore, quod vix poteramus equitare. in tota
siquidem illa quadragesima fuerat cibus noster millum cum aqua et sale
tantum, et in alijs similiter diebus ieiuniorum. nec habebamus aliquid ad
bibendum prater niuem in caldario liquefactam. ibamus autem per comaniam
equitando fortissime quoniam habebamus equos recentes quinquies aut pluries
in die, nisi quando per deserta ibamus, et tunc equos meliores atque
fortiores, qui possent continuum sustinere laborem, accipiebamus. et hoc ab
ineunte quadragesima vsque ad octo dies post pascha. [sidenote: comania
descriptio.] hac terra comania ab aquilone immediate post russiam habet
morduynos. byleros, id est, magnam bulgariam, bastarcos, id est, magnam
hungariam, post bastarcos, parositas et samogetas. [sidenote: oceanus
septentrionalis.] post samogetas, illos, qui dicuntur habere faciem caninam
in oceani littoribus desertis. a meridie habet alanos. circassos, gazaros,
graciam et constantinopolin, ac terram iberorum, cathos, brutachios, qui
dicuntur esse iudai, caput radentes per totum, terram quoque cithorum atque
georgianorum et armeniorum et turcorum. ab occidente autem hungariam habet
atque russiam. et est comania terra maxima et longa. cuius populos,
scilicet comanos, tartari occiderunt, quidam tamen a facie eorum fugerunt,
et quidam in eorum seruitutem redacti sunt. plurimi autem ex eis, qui
fugerunt, ad ipsos redierunt. [sidenote: terra kangittarum.] post hac
intrauimus terram kangittarum, qua magnam habet in plurimis locis penuriam
aquarum, in qua etiam homines pauci morantur propter aqua defectum.
[sidenote: ieroslaus, dux russia.] vnde homines ieroslai, ducis russia, cum
ad ipsum in terram tartarorum perrexerunt, plures eorum in illo deserto pra
siti mortui sunt. in hac etiam terra et in comania multa inuenimus capita
et ossa mortuorum hominum, super terram acentia tanquam sterquilinium. per
hanc itaque terram iuimus ab octo diebus post pascha fere vsque ad
ascensionem dominicam. huiusque habitatores pagani erant, et tam ipsi quam
comani non laborabant, sed tantum de animalibus viuebant, nec domos
adificabant, sed in tabernaculis habitabant. istos etiam tartari
deleuerunt, et habitabant in terris eorum, illique qui remanserunt, redacti
sunt in seruitutem ipsorum.


the same in english.

how departing from bathy, they passed through the land of comania, and of
  the kangitta. chap. 23.

moreouer, vpon easter euen, we were called vnto the tent, and there came
forth to meete vs the foresaid agent of bathy, saying on his masters
behalfe, that we should go into their land, vnto the emperor cuyne,
deteining certaine of our company with this pretence, that they would send
them backe vnto the pope, to whom we gaue letters of al our affaires to
deliuer vnto him. but being come as farre as duke montij aforesaid, there
they were kept vntill our returne. [sidenote: they trauelled post from
easter day to the 22 of iuly eastward to volga.] vpon easter day, hauing
said our praiers, and taken a slender breakfast, in the company of two
tartars, which were assigned vnto vs by corensa, we departed with many
teares, not knowing whether we went to death or to life. and we were so
feeble in bodie, that we were scarce able to ride. for all that lent
through, our meat was millet onely with a little water and salte. and so
likewise vpon other fasting dayes. neither had we ought to drinke, but snow
melted in a skillet. and passing through comania we rode most earnestly,
hauing change of horses fiue times or oftener in a day, except when we went
through deserts, for then we were allowed better and stronger horses, which
could vndergoe the whole labour. and thus farre had we trauailed from the
beginning of lent vntill eight dayes after easter. [sidenote: a description
of comania.] the land of comania on the north side immediately after
russia, hath the people called morduym byleri, that is, bulgaria magna, the
bastarci, that is, hungaria magna, next vnto the bastarci, the parosita and
the samogeta. [sidenote: the north ocean.] next vnto the samogeta are those
people which are sayd to haue dogges faces, inhabiting vpon the desert
shores of the ocean. on the south side it hath the alani, the circassi, the
gazari, greece and constantinople, also the land of iberia, the cathes, the
brutaches who are said to be iewes shauing their heads all ouer, the landes
also of scythia, of georgia, of armenia, of turkie. on the west side it
hath hungaria, and russia. also comania is a most large and long countrey.
the inhabitantes whereof called comani the tartars, slewe, some
notwithstanding fled from them, and the rest were subdued vnder their
bondage. but most of them that fled are returned againe. [sidenote: the
lande of the kangitta.] afterward wee entred the lande of the kangitta,
which in many places hath great scarcetie of waters, wherin there are but
fewe inhabitants by reason of the foresayd defect of water. [sidenote:
ieroslaus duke of russia.] for this cause diuers of the seruants of
ieroslaus duke of russia, as they were traueiling towards him into the land
of tartaria, died for thirst, in that desert. as before in comania, so
likewise in this countrey, wee found many skulles and bones of dead men
lying vpon the earth like a dunghill. through this countrey we were
traueiling from the eight day after easter vntil ascension day. the
inhabitants therof were pagans, and neither they nor the comanians vsed to
till the ground, but liued onely vpon cattell, neither built they any
houses but dwelled in tents. these men also haue the tartars rooted out,
and doe possesse and inhabite their countrey, howbeit, those that remained
are reduced into their bondage.


qualiter ad primam imperatoris futuri curiam deuenerunt. cap. 24.

[sidenote: terra biserminorum.] porro de terra kangittarum intrauimus
terram biserminorum, qui loquuntur lingua comanica, sed legem tenent
sarracenorum. in hac etiam terra inuenimus vrbes innumeras cum castris
dirutas, villasque multas desertas. [sidenote: altisoldanus.] huius dominus
dicebatur altisoldanus, qui cum tota sua progenie a tartaris est
destructus. [sidenote: montes maximi.] habet autem hac terra montes
maximos. et a meridie quidem habet hierosalem et baldach, totamque
sarracenorum terram. atque in finibus illis propinquis morantur duo fratres
carnales, [sidenote: burin. cadan. oceanus ab aquilone. syban, frater
bathy.] tartarorum duces, scilicet burin et cadan, filij thiaday, qui fuit
filius chingischam. ab aquilone vero terram habet nigrorum kythaorum and
oceanum. in illa vero moratur syban, frater bathy. per hanc iuimus a festo
ascensionis dominica fere vsque ad viij. dies ante festum sanct. iohan.
baptista. [sidenote: nigri cathayni.] deinde ingressi sumus terram nigrorum
kythaorum, in qua imperator adificauit domum, vbi etiam vocati fuimus ad
bibendum. et ille, qui erat ibidem ex parte imperatoris, fecit maiores
ciuitatis, et etiam duos filios eius, plaudere eoram nobis. [sidenote: mare
paruum.] hinc exeuntes, quoddam mare paruum inuenimus, in cuius littore
quidam existit mons paruus. in quo scilicet monte quoddam foramen esse
dicitur, vnde in hyeme tam maxima tempestates ventorum exeunt, quod homines
inde vix et cum magno periculo transire possunt. in astate vero semper
quidem ibi ventorum sonitus auditur, sed de foramine tenuiter egreditur.
per huius maris littora plurimis diebus perreximus, quod quidem licet non
multum sit magnum, plures insulas habet, et illud in sinistris dimisimus.
[sidenote: plurimus diebus. plures insula. ordu. cap. 13.] in terra vero
illa habitat ordu, quem omnium ducum tartarorum antiquiorem diximus, et est
orda, siue curia patris ipsius, quam inhabitat, et regis vna de vxoribus
eius. consuetudo enim est apud tartaros, quod principum et maiorum curia
non delentur, sed semper ordinantur aliqua mulieres, qua illas regant,
eisque donariorum partes, sicut dominis earum dari solebant, dantur.
[sidenote: prima curia imperatoris.] sic tandem ad primam imperatoris
curiam venimus, in qua erat vna de vxoribus ipsius.


the same in english,

how they came vnto the first court of the new emperour. chap. 24.

[sidenote: the land of the bisermini.] moreouer, out of the land of the
kangitta, we entered into the countrey of the bisermini, who speake the
language of comania, but obserue the law of the saracens. in this countrey
we found innumerable cities with castles ruined, and many towns left
desolate. [sidenote: alti soldanus. huge mountaines.] the lord of this
country was called soldan alti, who with al his progenie, was destroyed by
the tartars. this countrey hath most huge mountains. on the south side it
hath ierusalem and baldach, and all the whole countrey of the saracens.
[sidenote: burin and cadan.] in the next territories adioyning doe inhabite
two carnall brothers dukes of the tartars, namely, burin and cadan, the
sonnes of thyaday, who was the sonne of chingis can. [sidenote: the north
ocean.] on the north side thereof it hath the land of the blacke kythayans,
and the ocean. [sidenote: syban brother vnto bathy.] in the same countrie
syban the brother of bathy remaineth. through this countrie we were
traueiling from the feast of ascension, vntil eight daies before the feast
of s. iohn baptist. [sidenote: the blacke kythayans.] and then we entred
into the land of the blacke kythayans, in which the emperour built an
house, where we were called in to drinke. also the emperours deputy in that
place caused the chiefe men of the citie and his two sonnes to daunce
before vs. [sidenote: a small sea.] departing from hence, wee found a
certaine small sea, vpon the shore whereof stands a little mountaine. in
which mountaine is reported to be a hole, from whence, in winter time such
vehement tempests of winds doe issue, that traueilers can scarcely, and
with great danger passe by the same way. in summer time, the noise in deede
of the winde is heard there, but it proceedeth gently out of the hole.
[sidenote: many dayes.] along the shores of the aforesaid sea we traueiled
for the space of many dayes, which although it bee not very great, yet hath
it many islandes, and wee passed by leauiug it on our left hande.
[sidenote: ordu cap. 13.] in this lande dwelleth ordu, whom wee sayde to
bee auncient vnto all the tartarian dukes. and it is the orda or court of
his father which hee inhabiteth, and one of his wiues beareth rule there.
for it is a custome among the tartars, that the courts of princes or of
noble men are not dissolued, but alwayes some women are appointed to keepe
and gouerne them, vpon whom certain gifts are bestowed, in like sort as
they are giuen vnto their lords. [sidenote: the first court of the
emperour.] and so at length we arriued at the first court of the emperour,
wherein one of his wiues dwelt.


qualiter ad ipsum cuyne, imperatorem futurum peruenerunt. cap. 25.

at vero quia nondum imperatorem videramus, noluerunt vocare nos, nec
intromittere ad ordam ipsius, sed nobis in tentorio nostro secundum morem
tartarorum valde bene seruiri fecerunt, et vt quiesceremus, nos ibidem per
vnam diem tenuerunt. [sidenote: terra nyamanorum] inde procedentes in
vigilia sanctorum petri et pauli, terram naymanorum intrauimus, qui sunt
pagani. in ipsa vero die apostolorum ibidem cecidit magna nix, et habuimus
magnum frigus. hac quidem terra montiosa et frigida est supra modum, ibique
de planicie reperitur modicum. ista quoque dua nationes pradicta non
laborabant, sed sicut et tartari in tentorijs habitabant, quas et ipsi
deleuerant per hanc etiam multis diebus perreximus. deinde terram
mongalorum intrauimus, quos tartaros appellamus. [sidenote: tartaria. iulij
22. acceleratum legatorum iter.] per has itaque terras, vt credimus, tribus
septimanis equitando fortiter iuimus, et in die beata maria magdalena ad
cuyne imperatorem electum peruenimus. ideo autem per omnem viam istam valde
festinauimus, quia praceptum erat tartaris nostris, vt cito nos deducerent
ad curiam solennem, iam ex annis pluribus indictam, propter ipsius
imperatoris electionem. idcirco de mane surgentes, ibamus vsque ad noctem
sine comestione, et sapius tam tarde veniebamus, quod non comedebamus in
sero, sed quod manducare debebamus in vespere, dabatur nobis in mane.
mutatisque frequentius equis, nullatenus parcebatur eis, sed equitabamus
velociter ac sine intermissione, quantum poterant equi trotare.

the same in english.

howe they came vnto cuyne himselfe, who was forthwith to be chosen
  emperour. chap. 25.

but because we had not as yet seene the emperour, they would not inuite vs
nor admit vs into his orda, but caused good attendauce and entertainment,
after the tartars fashion, to be giuen vnto vs in oure owne tent, and they
caused vs to stay there, and to refresh our selues with them one day.
[sidenote: the land of naymani.] departing thence vpon the euen of saint
peter and saint paul, wee entered into the land of the naymani, who are
pagans. but vpon the very feast day of the saide apostles, there fel a
mightie snowe in that place, and wee had extreame colde weather. this lande
is full of mountaines, and colde beyonde measure, and there is little
plaine ground to bee seene. these two nations last mentioned vsed not to
till their grounde, but, like vnto the tartars, dwelt in tents, which the
sayde tartars had destroyed. through this countrey wee were trauailing
manie dayes. then entered wee into the lande of the mongals, whome wee call
tartars. through the tartars lande wee continued our trauaile (as wee
suppose) for the space of some three weekes, riding alwayes hastily and
with speede, and vpon the day of marie magdalene we arriued at the court of
cuyne the emperour elect. [sidenote: the 22. of iuly.] but therefore did we
make great haste all this way, because our tartarian guides were straightly
commaunded to bring vs vnto the court imperiall with all speede, which
court hath beene these if many yeeres, ordained for the election of the
emperour. wherefore rising earely, wee trauailed vntil night without eating
of any thing, and oftentimes wee came so late vnto our lodging, that we had
no time to eate the same night, but that which we should haue eaten ouer
night, was giuen vs in the morning. and often changing our horses, wee
spared no horse-fleshe, but rode swiftly and without intermission, as fast
as our horses could trot.


qualiter cuyne fratres minores suscepit. cap. 26.

cum autem peruenimus ad cuyne, fecit nobis dari tentorium et expensas,
quales tartaris dare solent, nobis tamen melius quam alijs nuncijs
faciebant. [sidenote: cuyne in legatos benignitas.] ad ipsum autem vocati
non fuimus, eo quod nondum electus erat, nec adhuc de imperio se
intromittebat. interpretatio tamen literarum domini papa, ac verba etiam a
nobis dicta, a pradicto baty erant ei mandata. cum ergo stetissemus ibi per
quinque vel sex dies, ad matrem suam nos transmisit, vbi adunabatur curia
solennis. [sidenote: tentorium regium.] et cum venissemus illuc, tam
extensum erat tentorium magnum, de alba purpura praparatum, eratque tam
grande nostro indicio, quod plusquam duo millia hominum poterant esse sub
illo. et in circuitu factum erat ligneum tabulatum varijs imaginibus
depictum. [sidenote: comitia.] illuc ergo perreximus cum tartaris, nobis ad
custodiam assignatis, ibique conuenerant omnes duces, et vnusquisque cum
hominibus suis equitaibat in circuitu per planiciem et colles. in prima die
vestiti sunt omnes purpuris albis, in secunda vero rubeis. et tunc venit
cuyne ad teritorium illud. porro tertia die fuerunt omnes in blaueis
purpuris, et quarta in optimis baldakinis. in illo autem tabulato iuxta
tentorium erant dua maiores porta, per quarum vnam solus imperator debebat
intrare, et ad illam nulla erat custodia, quamuis esset aperta, quia per
illam nullus audebat ingredi vel exire: per aliam omnes, qui admittebantur,
intrabant, et ad illam custodes cum gladijs et arcubus et sagittis erant.
itaque si quis tentorio propinquabat vltra terminos, qui positi erant, si
capiebatur, verberabatur, si fugiebat, sagitta siue ferro sagittabatur.
multique ibi erant, qui in franis, pectoralibus, sellis et huiusmodi,
iudicio nostro, auri circiter viginti marcas habebant. sic duces infra
tentorium colloquebantur, et de imperatoris electione tractabant, vt a
nobis creditur. alius autem vniuersus populus longe extra tabulatum
collocabatur, et ita fere vsque ad meridiem morabantur. tunc incipiebant
lac iumentinum bibere, et vsque ad vesperas tantum bibebant, quod erat visu
mirabile. [symposium procorum.] nos autem vocauerunt interius, et dederunt
nobis cereuisiam: quia iumentinum lac non bibebamus. et hoc quidem nobis
pro magno fecerunt honore: sed tamen nos compellebant ad bibendum, quod
nullatenus poteramus propter consuetudinem sustinere. vnde ostendimus eis,
hoc esse nobis graue, ideoque nos cessauerunt compellere. [ieroslaus dux
russia. legati diuersarum nationum.] foris autem erat dux ieroslaus de
susdal russia, pluresque duces kythaorum et solangorum. duo quoque filij
regis georgia, nuncius etiam caliphi de baldach, qui erat soldanus, et plus
quam decem alij soldani sarracenorum, vt credimus. et sicut nobis a
procuratoribus dicebatur, erant ibi nunciorum plus quam quatuor millia,
inter illos, qui tributa portabant, et illos, qui deferebant munera, et
soldanos ac duces alios, qui ad tradendum seipsos veniebant, et illos, pro
quibus ipsi miserant, illosque qui terrarum prafecti erant. hi omnes simul
extra tabulatum ponebantur, eisque simul bibere prabebatur. nobis autem et
duci ierozlao fere semper ab eis dabatur superior locus, quando cum eis
eramus exterius.


the same in english

how cuyne enterteined the minorite friers. chap. 26.

[sidenote: the curtesie of cuyne towards ambassadors] but when wee were
come vnto the court of cuyne, hee caused (after the tartars manner) a tent
and all expenses necessarie to bee prouided for vs. and his people
entreated vs with more regarde and courtesie, then they did anie other
ambassadours. howbeeit wee were not called before his presence, because hee
was not as yet elected, nor admitted vnto his empire. notwithstanding, the
interpretation of the popes letters, and the message which we deliuered,
were sent vnto him by the foresaid bathy. and hauing stayed there fiue or
sixe dayes, hee sent vs vnto his mother, vnder whome there was mainteyned a
verie solemne and royall court. [sidenote: the tent roial] and being come
thither, we saw an huge tent of fine white cloth pitched, which was, to our
iudgement, of so great quantitie, that more then two thousand men might
stand within it, and round about it there was a wall of planks set vp,
painted with diuers images. [sidenote: a generall assemblie] wee therefore
with our tartars assigned to attende vpon vs, tooke our iourney thither,
and there were all the dukes assembled, eche one of them riding vp and
downe with his traine ouer the hilles and dales. the first day they were
all clad in white, but the second in skarlet robes. then came cuyne vnto
the saide tent. moreouer, the third day they were all in blew robes, and
the fourth in most rich robes of baldakin cloth. in the wall of boardes,
about the tent aforesaid, were two great gates, by one of the which gates,
the emperour only was to enter, and at that gate there was no gard of men
appointed to stand, although it stood continually open, because none durst
go in or come out the same way: all that were admitted, entred by another
gate, at which there stood watchmen, with bowes, swords, and arrowes. and
whosoeuer approached vnto the tent beyond the bounds and limit assigned,
being caught, was beaten, but if he fled, he was shot at with arrowes or
iron. there were many to our iudgement, had vpon their bridles, trappers,
saddles, and such like furniture, to the value of 20 markes in pure gold.
the foresaid dukes (as we thinke) communed together within the tent, and
consulted about the election of their emperor. but all the residue of the
people were placed farre away without the walles of board, and in this
maner they staied almost til noone. [sidenote: the banquet of the nobles.]
then began they to drink mares milk, and so continued drinking til euen
tide, and that in so great quantity, as it was wonderfull. and they called
vs in vnto them, and gaue vs of their ale, because we could not drink their
mares milke. and this they did vnto vs in token of great honor. but they
compelled vs to drink so much, that in regard of our customary diet, wee
coulde by no means endure it. whereupon, giuing them to vnderstand, that it
was hurtful vnto vs, they ceassed to compel vs any more. [sidenote:
ieroslaus duke of susdal.] without the doore stoode duke ieroslaus of
susdal, in russia, and a great many dukes of the kythayans, and of the
solangi. the two sonnes also of the king of georgia, the ligier of the
caliph of baldach, who was a soldan, and (as we thinke) aboue ten soldans
of the saracens beside. [sidenote: ambassadors of sundry nations.] and, as
it was tolde vs by the agents, there were more than 4000. ambassadors,
partly of such as paide tributes, and such as presented gifts, and other
soldans, and dukes, which came to yeeld themselues, and such as the tartars
had sent for, and such as were gouernours of lands. all these were placed
without the lists, and had drinke giuen vnto them. but almost continually
they all of them gaue vs and duke ieroslaus the vpper hand, when we were
abroad in their companie.


qualiter in imperium sublimatus fuit. cap. 27.

[sidenote: imperij cuyna primitia.] et quidem, si bene meminimus ibidem per
septimanas circiter quatuor fuimus. credimusque quod ibi fuit electio
celebrata, non tamen ibidem fuit publicata. propter hoc autem id maxime
credebatur, quia semper, quando cuyne tentorio exibat, eidem cantabatur, et
cum virgis speciosis, in summitate lanam coccineam habentibus,
inclinabatur, quod alteri ducum nulli fiebat, quousque exterius morabatur.
[sidenote: syra orda.] hac autem statio siue curia nominatur ab eis syra
orda. [sidenote: aurea orda.] hac exeuntes, vnanimiter omnes equitauimus
per tres aut quaruor leucas ad alium locum, vbi erat in quadam pulchra
planicie iuxta riuum inter montes aliud tentorium, quod apud ipsos
appellatur orda aurea, praparatum. ibi enim cuyne debebat poni in sede in
die assumptionis domina nostra [sidenote: augusti 15.]. sed propter
grandinem nuniam, qua tunc, vt supra dictum est, cecidit, res dilata fuit.
eratque tentorium in columnis positum, qua laminis aureis erant tecta, et
clauis aureis cum alijs lignis fixa. porro de baldakino erat tectum
superius, sed alij erant panni exterius. fuimus autem ibi vsque ad festum
beati bartholomai, in quo maxima multitudo conuenit, et contra mendiem
versis vultibus stetit. [sidenote: preces solemnes.] et quidam ad iactum
lapidis longe a cateris erant, semperque orationes faciendo, ac genua
flectendo, contra meridiem longius et longius procedebant. nos autem virum
incantationes facerunt, aut genua deo vel alteri flecterent, nescientes,
nolebamus facere genu flexiones. cumque diu ita fecissent, ad tentorium
reuersi sunt, et cuyne in sede imperiali posuerunt, ducesque coram eo genua
flexerunt. post hoc idem fecit vniuersus populus, exceptis nobis, qui eis
subditi non eramus.


the same in english.

how he was exalted to his empire. chap. 27.

[sidenote: the beginnings of cuyne his empire.] and to our remembrance, we
remained there, about the space of foure weekes. the election was to our
thinking there celebrated, but it was not published and proclaimed there.
and it was greatly suspected so to be, because alwayes when cuyne came
forth out of the tent, he had a noyse of musicke, and was bowed vnto, or
honoured with faire wands, hauing purple wooll vpon the tops of them, and
that, so long as he remained abroad: which seruice was performed to none of
the other dukes. [sidenote: syra orda.] the foresaid tent or court is
called by them syra orda. [sidenote: the golden orda.] departing thence,
wee all with one accord rode 3 or 4 leagues vnto another place, where, in a
goodly plaine, by a riuers side, betweene certaine mountaines, there was
another tent erected, which was called the golden orda. for there was cuyne
to be placed in the throne emperiall, vpon the day of the assumption of our
ladie [sidenote: the 15th of august.]. but, for the abundance of haile
which fell at the same time, as is aboue said, the matter was deferred.
there was also a tent erected vpon pillars, which were couered with plates
of golde, and were ioyned vnto other timber with golden nailes. [sidenote:
wollen cloth.] it was couered aboue with baldakin cloth, but there was
other cloth spread ouer that, next vnto the ayre. wee abode there vnto the
feast of saint bartholomew, what time there was assembled an huge multitude
standing with their faces towards the south. and a certaine number of them
beeing a stones cast distant from the residue, making continuall prayers,
and kneeling vpon their knees, proceeded farther and farther towards the
south. howbeit wee, not knowing whether they vsed inchantments, or whether
they bowed their knees to god or to some other, woulde not kneele vpon the
grounde with them. and hauing done so a long time, they returned to the
tent, and placed cuyne in his throne imperiall, and his dukes bowed their
knees before him. afterwarde the whole multitude kneeled downe in like
maner, except our selues, for wee were none of his subiects.


de atate ac moribus ac sigillo ipsius. cap. 28.

[sidenote: cuyna atas et mores.] hic autem imperator quando sublimatus est
in regnum videbatur esse circiter xl. vel xlv. annorum. mediocris erat
statura, prudens valde, nimis astutus multumque seriosus, et grauis in
moribus. nec vnquam videbat eum homo de facili ridere, vel aliquam
leuitatem facere, sicut dicebant christiani, qui cum ipso morabantur
continue. dicebant etiam nobis asserendo firmiter christiani, qui erant de
familia eius, quod deberet fieri christianus. [sidenote: studium
christianismi.] cuius signum erat, quod ipse clericos christianos tenebat,
et expensas eis dabat. habebat etiam semper capellam christianorum ante
maius, tentorium suum, vbi cantant clerici publice et aperte, ac pulsant ad
horas, vt cateri christiani secundum mores gracorum, quantacunque sit ibi
multitudo tartarorum, vel etiam aliorum hominum. hoc tamen non faciunt alij
duces ipsorum. [sidenote: maiestas.] est autem mos imperatoris ipsius, vt
nunquam ore proprio loquatur cum extraneo, quantumcunque magnus sit, sed
audit et respondet per interpositam personam, et quandocunque negotium
proponunt, vel imperatoris responsionem audiunt illi, qui sub eo sunt,
quantumcunque sint magni, flexis genibus vsque ad finem verborum
persistunt. nec alicui de consuetudine super aliquo negotio loqui licitum
est, postquam ab imperatore definitum est. habet autem imperator pradictus
procuratorem et protonotarios, atque scriptores, omnesque officiales in
negotijs tam publicis quam priuatis, excepris aduocatis. [sidenote:
potestas ex lex.] nam sine litium vel iudiciorum strepitu secundum
arbitrium imperatoris omnia fiunt. alij quoque principes tartarorum de his,
qua ad illos pertinent, idem faciunt. [sideote: bellum in christianos
cogitatum.] hoc autem nouerint vniuersi, quia nobis tunc existentibus in
solenni curia, iam ex pluribus annis indicia, idem cuyne imperator, de nouo
electus, cum omnibus suis principibus erexit vexillum contra ecclesiam dei,
ac romanum imperium, et contra omnia regna christianorum et populos
occidentis, nisi fortasse, quod absit, facerent ea, qua mandabat domino
papa, atque potentibus, et omnibus christianorum populis, videlicet vt ipsi
subdantur eis. nam excepta christianitate, nulla est terra in orbe, quam
timeant, et idcirco contra nos ad pugnam se praparant. huius siquidem
imperatoris pater, scilicet occoday, necatus fuerat veneno, et ob hoc a
bellis quieuerant tempore pauco. intentio autem eorum, vt dictum est supra,
est, sibi totum subijcere mundum, sicut a chingischam habent mandatum. vnde
et ipse imperator in literis suis ita scribit: dei fortitudo, hominum
imperator. in superscriptione quoque sigilli eius est hoc: deus in coelo,
et cuyne cham super terram, dei fortitudo: omnium hominum imperatoris
sigillum.

+ et praclare aristoteles politic. lib. 3. cap. 12. in hanc sententiam: qui
    legem praesse vult, is velle videtur deum ac leges imperare: qui autem
    vult hominem, is etiam belluam adiungit, cum prasertim tale quid sit
    cupiditas et iracundia: et magistratus et optimus quisque a recta via
    detorqueantur &c. adde qua e chrysippo adducuntur ff. li. i. tit. 3. 1.
    2.


the same in english.

of his age and demeanour, and of his seale. chap. 28.

this emperour, when hee was exalted vnto his gouernment, seemed to bee
about the age of fourty or fourty fiue yeeres. he was of a meane stature,
very wise and politike, and passing serious and graue in all his demeanour.
a rare thing it was, for a man to see him laugh or behaue himself lightly,
as those christians report, which abode continually with him. [sidenote:
his inclination to christianitie.] certaine christians of his familie
earnestly and strongly affirmed vnto vs, that he himselfe was about to
become a christian. a token and argument whereof was, that hee reteined
diuers cleargie men of the christians. hee had likewise at all times a
chappell of christians, neere vnto his great tent, where the clearkes (like
vnto other christians, and according to the custome of the gracians) doe
sing publiquely and openly, and ring belles at certaine houres, bee there
neuer so great a multitude of tartars, or of other people in presence. and
yet none of their dukes doe the like. [sidenote: his maiestie.] it is the
manner of the emperour neuer to talke his owne selfe with a stranger,
though he be neuer so great, but heareth and answeareth by a speaker. and
when any of his subiects (howe great soeuer they bee) are in propounding
anie matter of importaunce vnto him, or in hearing his answeare, they
continue kneeling vpon their knees vnto the ende of their conference.
neither is it lawfull for any man to speake of any affaires, after they
haue beene determined of by the emperour. the sayde emperour, hath in his
affaires both publike and priuate, an agent, and secretary of estate, with
scribes and all other officials, except aduocates. [sidenote: a lawlesse
authoritie.] for, without the noyse of pleading, or sentence giuing, all
things are done according to the emperours will and pleasure. other
tartarian princes do the like in those things which belong vnto them.
[sidenote: warre intended against all christians.] but, be it known vnto al
men, that whilest we remained at the said emperours court, which hath bin
ordained and kept for these many yeeres, the sayde cuyne being emperour new
elect, together with al his princes, erected a flag of defiance against the
church of god, and romane empire, and against al christian kingdomes and
nationes of the west, vnlesse peraduenture (which god forbid) they will
condescend vnto those things, which he hath inioined vnto our lord the
pope, and to all potentates and people of the christians, namely, that they
wil become obedient vnto him. for, except christendom, there is no land
vnder heauen, which they stande in feare of, and for that cause they
prepare themselues to battel against vs. this emperors father, namely
occoday, was poisoned to death, which is the cause why they haue for a
short space absteined from warre. but their intent and purpose is (as i
haue aboue said) to subdue the whole world vnto themselues, as they were
commanded by chingis can. hence it is that the emperor in his letters
writeth after this maner: the power of god, and emperour of all men. also,
vpon his seale, there is this posie ingrauen: god in heauen, and cuyne can
vpon earth, the power of god: the seale of the emperour of all men.


de admissione fratrum et nuncioram ad imperatorem. cap. 29.

[sidenote: cuyne audit legatos.] in loco illo, vbi positus est imperator in
throno, vocati fuimus coram ipso. cumque chingay protonotarius eius nomina
nostra scripsisset, illorumque a quibus missi eramus, et ducis solangorum
et aliorum, clamauit alta voce, recitans illa coram imperatore ac ducum
vniuersitate. quo facto, flexit vnusquisque nostrum quater genu sinistrum,
et monuerunt, ne tangeremus limen deorsum. cumque pro cultellis nos
diligentissime scrutati fuissent, et nullatenus inuenissent, intrauimus
ostium ab orientale parte: quia nullus ab occidente, nisi solus imperator,
audet intrare. similiter et dux ab illa parte ingreditur solus, si est
tentorium eius. minores autem non multum curant de talibus. tunc ergo
primum in eius prasentia suam intrauimus stationem, videlicet postquam
factus est imperator ibidem. [sidenote: munera eidem oblata.] omnes quoque
nuncij tunc ab eo recepti sunt, sed paucissimi tentorium eius intrauerunt.
ibi vero tanta donaria ab ipsis nuncijs fuerunt ei prasentata, quod quasi
videbantur infinita, videlicet in samitis ac purpureis et baldakinis ac
cingulis sericis cum auro praparatis, pellibus etiam nobilibus, caterisque
muneribus. quoddam etiam solinum, siue tentoriolum, quod super caput
imperatoris portatur, fuit eidem prasentatum, quod totum erat cum gemmis
praparatum. quidam vero preafectus vnius prouincia adduxit ei camelos
multos cum baldakinis tectos. similiter sella posita cum instrumentis
quibusdam erant, in quibus homines interius sedere valebant. equos etiam
multos et mulos adducebant eidem phaleratos et armatos, quosdam quidem de
corio, et quosdam de ferro. nos etiam requisiti fuimus, an ei munera dare
vellemus: sed iam facultas non erat, quoniam omnia fere nostra
consumpseramus. [sidenote: currus.] ibidem longe a stationibus super montem
erant positi currus plusquam quingenti, qui omnes auro et argento ac
sericis vestibus erant pleni. cunctique inter imperatorem et duces diuisi
fuerunt, singulique duces inter homines suos partes suas, vt eis placuit,
diuiserunt.


the same in english.

of the admission of the friers and ambassadours vnto the emperour. chap.
  29.

[sidenote: cuyne heareth the legates.] in the same place where the emperour
was established into his throne, we were summoned before him. and chirigay,
his chiefe secretary hauing written down our names, and the names of them
that sent vs, with the name of the duke of solangi, and of others, cried
out with a loude voice, rehearsing the said names before the emperour, and
the assembly of his dukes. which beeing done, ech one of vs bowed his left
knee foure times, and they gaue vs warning not to touch the threshold. and
after they had searched vs most diligently for kniues, and could not find
any about vs, we entred in at the doore vpon the east side: because no man
dare presume to enter at the west doore, but the emperour onely. in like
maner, euery tartarian duke entreth on the west side into his tent. howbeit
the inferiour sort doe not greatly regard such ceremonies. this therefore
was the first time, when we entred into the emperours tent in his presence,
after he was created emperour. likewise all other ambassadours were there
receiued by him, but very fewe were admitted into his tent. [sidenote:
gifts presented vnto him.] and there were presented vnto him such abundance
of gifts by the saide ambassadours, that they seemed to be infinite, namely
in samites, robes of purple, and of baldakin cloth, silke girdles wrought
with golde, and costly skinnes, with other gifts also. likewise there was a
certaine sun canopie, or small tent (which was to bee carried ouer the
emperours head) presented vnto him, being set full of precious stones. and
a gouernour of one prouince brought vnto him a companie of camels couered
with baldakins. they had saddles also vpon their backs, with certaine other
instruments, within the which were places for men to sitte vpon. also they
brought many horses and mules vnto him furnished with trappes and
caparisons, some being made of leather, and some of iron. and we were
demanded whether we would bestow any gifts vpon him or no? but wee were not
of abilitie so to doe, hauing in a maner spent all our prouision.
[sidenote: 500 carts ful of treasure.] there were also vpon an hill
standing a good distance from the tents, more than 500. carts, which were
all ful of siluer and of gold, and silke garments. and they were all
diuided betweene the emperour and his dukes, and euery duke bestowed vpon
his owne followers what pleased him.


de loco diuisionis imperatoris et matris sua, et morte ieroslai, ducis
  russia. cap. 30.

[sidenote: tentorium purpureum.] inde recedentes, venimus ad alium locum,
vbi tentorium mirabile, totum de purpura rufa, quod kitay dederant, erat
positum. illic interius introducti fuimus, et semper cum intrabamus nobis
dabatur ad bibendum cereuisia vel vinum, et etiam carnes cocta, si
volebamus, ad edendum. [sidenote: solium churnum.] eratque solariolum vnum,
de tabulis alte praparatum, vbi thronus imperatoris erat positus, ex ebore
mirabiliter sculptus, in quo etiam erat aurum, et lapides preciosi, si bene
meminimus, et illuc ascendebatur per gradus. eratque rotundum superius.
banci vero erant positi in circuitu sedis, vbi domina sedebant a parte
sinistra in scamnis, a dextris autem nemo sedebat superius, sed duces
sedebant in bancis inferius, et hoc in medio. alij vero sedebant, post eos,
et quolibet die veniebat dominarum maxima multitudo. ista vero tria
tentoria, de quibus supra diximus, erant valde magna, aliaque habebant
vxores eius de filtro albo satis magna et pulchra. ibidem imperator diuisus
est a matre sua, qua iuit in vnam terra partem, et imperator in aliam ad
iudicia facienda. capta siquidem erat amica imperatoris istius, qua veneno
interfecerat patrem eius, eo tempore, quo exercitus eoram in hungaria fuit.
propter quod etiam exercitus eorum, qui erat in partibus illis, recessit.
[sidenote: nex occoday vindicata. ieroslaus dux russia.] de qua cum alijs
pluribus factum fuit iudicium, et occisi fuerunt. eodem tempore mortuus
fuit ierozlaus, dux magnus soldal, qua est quadam russia pars. vocatus enim
ad matrem imperatoris quasi pro honore, vt manducaret ac biberet de manu
ipsius, in continenti ad hospitum est reuersus, infirmatusque mortuus est
post septem dies, totumque corpus eius miro modo glaucum effectum est,
dicebaturque ab omnibus, quod ibidem, vt terram eius libere ac plenarie
possiderent, fuisset impotionatus.


the same in english.

of the place where the emperour and his mother tooke their leaues one of
  another, and of ieroslaus duke of russia. chap. 30.

[sidenote: a tent of purple.] departing thence, we came vnto another place,
where a wonderfull braue tent, all of red purple, giuen by the kythayans,
was pitched. wee were admitted into that also, and alwaies when we entred,
there was giuen vnto vs ale and wine to drinke, and sodden fleshe (when we
would) to eate. [sidenote: a throne of iuorie.] there was also a loftie
stage built of boords, where the emperour's throne was placed, being verie
curiously wrought out of iuorie, wherein also there was golde and precious
stones, and (as we remember) there were certain degrees or staires to
ascend vnto it. and it was round vpon the top. there were benches placed
about the saide throne, whereon the ladies sate towarde the left hand of
the emperour vpon stooles, (but none sate aloft on the right hand) and the
dukes sate vpon benches below, the said throne being in the midst. certaine
others sate behind the dukes, and euery day there resorted great companie
of ladies thither. the three tents whereof we spake before, were very
large, but the emperour his wiues had other great and faire tentes made of
white felt. this was the place where the emperour parted companie with his
mother: for she went into one part of the land; and the emperour into
another to execute iustice. for there was taken a certaine concubine of
this emperour, which had poysoned his father to death, at the same time
when the tartars armie was in hungarie, which, for the same cause returned
home. [sidenote: the death of occoday reuenged.] moreouer, vpon the
foresaide concubine, and many other of her confederats sentence of
iudgement was pronounced, and they were put to death. at the same time
ieroslaus the great duke of soldal, which is a part of russia, deceased.
for being (as it were for honours sake) inuited to eate and drinke with the
emperours mother, and immediately after the banquet, returning vnto his
lodging, he fel sicke, and within seuen dayes, died. and after his death,
his body was of a strange blew colour, and it was commonly reported, that
the said duke was poisoned, to the ende that the tartars might free and
totally possess his dukedome.


qualiter tandem fratres ad imperatorem accedentes, literas dederunt &
  acceperunt. cap. 31.

[sidenote: cuyne cum legatis dissimulanter agit.] denique tartari nostri
nos ad imperatorem duxerunt: qui cum audisset per illos, nos ad eum
venisse, iussit nos ad matrem redire. volebat enim secundo die, sicut
superius dictum est, contra totam occidentis terram vexillum erigere, quod
nos volebat ignorare. itaque reuersi stetimus paucis diebus, & iterum ad
ipsum reuersi sumus. cum quo bene per mensem fuimus in tanta fame ac siti,
quod vix viuere poteramus. nam expensa, qua nobis pro diebus quatuor
debantur, vix vni sufficiebant. nec inuenire poteramus aliquid ad emendum,
quia forum erat nimis remotum. [sidenote: cosmas russus.] sed dominus nobis
quendam ruthenum, nomine cosmam, aurifabrum praparauit, qui satis dilectus
imperatori, nos in aliquo sustentauit. et hic nobis ostendit thronum
imperatoris, quem ipse fecerat, antequam poneretur in sede, & sigillum
eiusdem, quod etiam fabricauerat ipse. [sidenote: chingay internuncius.]
post hoc imperator pro nobis misit, nobisque per chingay protonotarium suum
dici fecit, vt verba nostra & negotia scriberemus, eique porrigeremus. quod
& fecimus. post plures dies nos iterum vocari fecit, & vtrum essent apud
dominum papam, qui ruthenorum vel sarracenorum, aut etiam tartarorum
literam intelligerent, interrogauit. cui respondimus, quod nullam istarum
literarum habebamus. sarraceni tamen erant in terra, sed remoti erant a
domino papa. diximus tamen, quia nobis expedire videbatur, quod in
tartarico scriberent, & nobis interpretarentur, nos autem in litera nostra
diligenter scriberemus, & tam literam quam interpretationem ad dominum
papam deferremus. tunc a nobis recesserunt, & ad imperatorem iuerunt. porro
a die beati martini fuimus vocati. tunc kadac, totius imperij procurator, &
chingay & bala, pluresque scriptores ad nos venerunt, nobisque literam de
verbo ad verbum interpretati fuerunt. et cum in latina litera
scripsissemus, faciebant sibi per singulas orationes interpretari, volentes
scire, si nos in aliquo verbo erraremus. cum igitur amba litera fuissent
scripta, fecerunt nos semel ac secundo legere, ne forte minus aliquid
haberemus. dixerunt enim nobis, videte, quod omnia bene intelligatis, quia
non expediret, quod non omnia bene intelligeretis. literas etiam in
sarracenico scripserunt, vt aliquis in partibus nostris inueniri posset,
qui eas, si opus esset, legeret.


the same in english.

how the friers coming at length vnto the emperour, gaue, and receiued
  letters. chap. 31.

[sidenote: coyne dissembleth with the legates.] to be short, the tartars
brought vs vnto their emperor, who when he had heard of them, that we were
come vnto him, commanded that we should return, vnto his mother. for he was
determined the next day, (as it is abouesaid) to set vp a flag of defiance
against all the countreis of the west, which he would haue vs in no case to
know. wherefore returning, we staid some few dayes with his mother, and so
returned backe again vnto him. with whom we continued for the space of one
whole moneth in such extreme hunger and thirst, that we could scarce hold
life and soule together. for the prouision allowed vs for foure dayes, was
scantly sufficient for one day. neither could we buy vs any sustenance,
because the market was too farre off. [sidenote: cosmas a russian.] howbeit
the lorde prouided for vs a russian goldsmith, named cosmas, who being
greatly in the emperours fauour, procured vs some sustenance. this man
shewed vnto vs the throne of the emperour, which hee had made, before it
was set in the proper place, and his seale, which he also had framed.
[sidenote: the message of chingay.] afterward the emperor sent for vs,
giuing vs to vnderstand by chingay his chief secretary, that wee should
write downe our messages & affaires, and should deliuer them vnto him.
which thing we performed accordingly. after many daies he called for vs
againe, demanding whether there were any with our lord the pope, which
vnderstood the russian, the saracen, or the tartarian language? to whom we
answered, that we had none of those letters or languages. howbeit, that
there were certaine saracens in the land, but inhabiting a great distance
from our lord the pope. and wee saide, that wee thought it most expedient,
that when they had written their mindes in the tartarian language, and had
interpreted the meaning thereof vnto vs, we should diligently translate it
into our own tongue, and so deliuer both the letter and the translation
thereof vnto our lord the pope. then departed they from vs, and went vnto
the emperour. and after the day of s. martine, we were called for againe.
then kadac, principal agent for the whole empire, and chingay, and bala,
with diuers other scribes, came vnto vs, and interpreted the letter word
for word. and hauing written it in latine, they caused vs to interprete
vnto them eche sentence, to wit if we had erred in any word. and when both
letters were written, they made vs to reade them ouer twise more, least we
should haue mistaken ought. for they said vnto vs: take heed that ye
vnderstand all things throughly, for if you should not vnderstand the whole
matter aright, it might breed some inconuenience. they wrote the said
letters also in the saracen tongue that there might be some found in our
dominions which could reade and interprete them, if need should require.


qualiter licentiati fuerunt. cap. 32.

vt autem nobis tartari nostri dixerunt, proposuit imperator nuncios suos
nobiscum mittere. volebat tamen, vt credimus, quod nos id ab eo peteremus.
sed cum vnus de tartaris nostris, qui senior erat, nos ad hoc petendum
hortaretur, nobis quidem, vt venirent, ne quaquam bonum videbatur.
[sidenote: legate abhorrent a tartarorum ad christianos legatione.] ideoque
respondimus ei, quod non erat nostrum petere, sed si sponte ipse imperator
mitteret eos, libenter eos secure conduceremus, domino adiuuante. nobis
autem ob plures causas vt venirent, non videbatur expedire. prima quidem
fuit, quia timuimus, ne visis dissentionibus aut guerris, qua fiunt inter
nos, magis animarentur ad veniendum contra nos. secunda fuit, timebamus eos
exploratores terra fieri. tertia vero, quia timebamus eos interfici. gentes
enim nostra arrogantes sunt et superba. vnde quando seruientes, qui stant
nobiscum, ex rogatu cardinalis, legati scilicet alemannia, in habitu
tartarico ibant ad ipsum, in via fere lapidati sunt a teutonicis, et coacti
sunt deponere habitum illum. consuetudo autem est tartarorum, vt cum illis,
qui nuncios eorum occiderint, nunquam faciant pacem, nisi sumant de ipsis
vltionem. quarta etiam causa fuit, quia timebamus ne nobis auferrentur vi.
quinta vero causa erat, quia de aduentu eorum nulla foret vtilitas, cum
nullum haberent aliud mandatum vel potestatem, nisi quod literas
imperatoris ad dominum papam et ad principes deferrent, quas videlicet
literas ipsi nos habebamus, et malum ex eorum aduentu posse contingere
credebamus. itaque tertia die post hoc, scilicet in festo beati briccij
[sidenote: nouemb. 13.] nobis dederunt licentiam et literam, imperatoris
sigillo munitam, mittentes nos ad ipsius imperatoris matrem, qua vnicuique
nostrum dedit pelliceum, vnum de pellibus vulpinis, quod habebat pilos de
foris, et purpuram vnam. [sidenote: honorantur commeatu et lautijs.] de
quibus tartari nostri furati sunt ex vnaquaque vnum passum. de ilia quoque
qua dabatur seruienti, meliorem medietatem sunt furati. quod nos quidem non
ignorauimus, sed inde verba mouere noluimus.


the same in english.

how they were licensed to depart. chap. 32.

[sidenote: the legates are loth to haue any ambassadours sent from the
tartars to the christians.] and (as our tartars told vs) the emperour was
purposed to send his ambassadors with vs. howbeit, he was desirous (as we
thought) that we our selues should craue that fauour at his hands. and when
one of our tartars being an ancient man, exhorted vs to make the said
petition, we thought it not good for vs, that the emperour should send his
ambassadours. wherefore we gaue him answere, that it was not for vs to make
any such petition, but if it pleased the emperour of his owne accord to
send them, we would diligently (by gods assistance) see them conducted in
safetie. howbeit, we thought it expedient for vs, that they should not goe,
and that for diuers causes first, because we feared, least they, seeing the
dissentions and warres which are among vs should be the more encouraged to
make warre against vs. secondly, we feared, that they would be insteade of
spies and intelligencers in our dominions. thirdly, we misdoubted that they
would be slaine by the way. for our nations be arrogant and proud. for when
as those seruants (which at the request of the cardinall, attended vpon vs,
namely the legates of almaine) returned vnto him in the tartars attire,
they were almost stoned in the way, by the dutch, and were compelled to put
off those garments. and it is the tartars custome, neuer to bee reconciled
vnto such as haue slaine their ambassadours, till they haue reuenged
themselues. fourthly, least they should bee taken from vs by mayne force.
fiftly, because there could come no good by their ambassade, for they were
to haue none other commission, or authoritie, but onely to deliuer their
emperours letter vnto the pope, and to the princes of christendome, which
very same letters wee our selues had, and we knew right well, that much
harme might ensue thereof. wherefore, the third day after this, namely,
vpon the feast of saint brice [sidenote: nouember 13.], they gaue vs our
passe-port and a letter sealed with the emperours owne seale, sending vs
vnto the emperours mother, who gaue vnto eche of vs a gowne made of foxe
skinnes, with the furre on the outside, and a piece of purple. [sidenote:
they are rewarded with gifts.] and our tartars stole a yard out of euery
one of them. and out of that which was giuen vnto our seruant, they stole
the better halfe. which false dealing of theirs we knew well enough, but
would make no words thereof.


qualiter ab illo itinere redierunt. cap. 33.

[sidenote: difficilis legatorum reditus.] tunc iter ad reuertendum
arripuimus, at per totam hyemem venimus, iacentes in desertis sapius in
niue, nisi quantum poteramus nobis cum pede locum facere. ibi quippe non
erant arbores; sed planus campus. et sape mane nos inueniebamus totos niue,
quam ventus pellebat, coopertos. sic venientes vsque ad ascensionem domini
peruenimus ad bathy. [sidenote: bathy.] a quo cum inquireremus, quid
responderet domino papa, dixit se nolle aliud, nisi quod imperator
diligenter scripserat, demandare. datisque nobis de conductu literis, ab eo
recessimus, & sabbatho infra octauas pentecostes vsque ad montij
peruenimus, vbi erant socij nostri, ac seruientes, qui fuerant retenti,
quos ad nos fecimus reduci. [sidenote: corrensa.] hinc vsque corrensam
peruenimus, cui iterum a nobis donaria petenti non dedimus, quia non
habebamus. deditque nobis duos comanos, qui erant ex tartarorum plebe,
vsque ad kiouiam russia. tartarus tamen noster non dimisit nos, donec
exiremus vltimam tartarorum custodiam. isti vero alij, qui nobis a corrensa
dati sunt, in sex diebus ab vltima custodia vsque ad kiouiam nos duxerunt.
venimus autem illuc ante festum beati iohannis baptista xv. diebus.
[sidenote: iunij 8. gratulationes reducibus facta. basilius & daniel
principes.] porro kiouienses aduentum nostrum percipientes, occurrerunt
nobis omnes latanter. congratulabantur enim nobis, tanquam a morte
suscitatis. sic fecerunt nobis per totam russiam, poloniam & bohemiam.
daniel & wasilico frater eius festum nobis magnum fecerunt, & nos contra
voluntatem nostram bene per octo dies tenuerunt. medioque tempore inter se
& cum episcopis, caterisque probis viris, super his, qua locuti fueramus
eisdem, in processu nostro ad tartaros consilium habentes, responderunt
nobis communiter, dicentes: [sidenote: russi agnoscunt primatum papa.] quod
dominum papam habere vellent in specialem dominum, & in patrem, sanctam
quoque romanam ecclesiam in dominam & magistram, confirmantes etiam omnia,
qua prius de hac materia per abbatem suum transmiserant. et super hoc etiam
nobiscum ad dominum papam nuncios suos & literas transmiserunt.


the same in english.

how they returned homewards. chap. 33.

[sidenote: the sore iourneys of the legates in returning.] then taking our
iourney to returne, we trauailed all winter long, lying in the deserts
oftentimes vpon the snow, except with our feete wee made a piece of ground
bare to lye vpon. for there were no trees, but the plaine champion
[footnote: champagne (fr.) open] field. and oftentimes in the morning, we
found our selues all couered with snow driuen ouer vs by the winde.
[sidenote: bathy.] and so trauailing till the feast of our lordes
ascension, we arriued at the court of bathy. of whom when wee had enquired,
what answere he would send vnto our lord the pope, he said that he had
nothing to giue vs in charge, but onely that we should diligently deliuer
that which the emperour had written. and, hauing receued letters for our
safe conduct, the thirteenth day after pentecost, being saterday, wee were
proceeded as farre as montij, with whome our foresaide associates and
seruants remained, which were withheld from vs, and we caused them to be
deliuered vnto vs. [sidenote: corrensa.] from hence wee trauailed vnto
corrensa, to whom, requiring gifts the second time at our hands, we gaue
none, because we had not wherewithall. and hee appointed vs two comanians,
which liued among the common people of the tartars, to be our guides vnto
the citie of kiow in russia. howbeit one of our tartars parted not from vs,
till we were past the vtmost gard of the tartars. but the other guides,
namely the comanians, which were giuen vs by corrensa, brought vs from the
last garde vnto the citie of kiow, in the space of sixe dayes. and there we
arriued fifteene dayes before the feast of saint iohn baptist. [sidenote:
iune 8. how they were welcomed at their returne.] moreouer, the citizens of
kiow hauing intelligence of our approach, came foorth all of them to meet
vs, with great ioy. for they reioyced ouer vs, as ouer men that had bene
risen from death to life. so likewise they did vnto vs throughout all
russia, polonia, and bohemia. [sidenote: basilius and daniel princes.]
daniel and his brother wasilico made vs a royall feast, and interteined vs
with them against our willes for the space of eight dayes. in the mean
time, they with their bishops, and other men of account, being in
consultation together about those matters which we had propounded vnto them
in our iourney towards the tartars, answered vs with common consent,
saying: that they would holde the pope for their speciall lord and father,
and the church of rome for their lady & mistresse, confirming likewise al
things which they had sent concerning this matter, before our comming, by
their abbate. and for the same purpose, they sent their ambassadours and
letters by vs also, vnto our lord the pope.

       *       *       *       *       *

itinerarium fratris willielmi de rubruquis de ordine fratrum minorum,
  galli, anno gratia 1253. ad partes orientales.

excellentissimo domino & christianissimo, lodouico dei gratia regi
francorum illustri, frater willielmus de rubruquis in ordine fratrum
minorum minimus salutem, & semper triumphare in christo. scriptum est in
ecclesiastico de sapiente [marginal note: ecclus 39. ver 4.], in terram
alienarum gentium transibit, bona & mala in omnibus tentabit. hoc opus,
domine mi rex, feci: sed vltinam vt sapiens et non stultus. multi enim
faciunt quod facit sapiens, sed non sapienter, sed magis stulte; de quorum
numero timeo me esse. tamen quocunque modo fecerim; quia dixistis mihi
quando recessi a vobis, vt omnia scriberem vobis, quacunque viderem inter
tartaros, & etiam monuistis vt non timerem vobis scribere longas literas,
facio quod iniunxistis: cum timore tamen & verecundia, quia verba congrua
mihi non suppetunt, qua debeam tanta scribere maiestati. nouerit ergo
vestra sancta maiestas, quod anno domini millessimo ducentessimo,
quinquagessimo tertio, nonas maij ingressi sumus mare ponti, quod bulgarici
vocant, maius mare: & habet mille octo milliaria in longum, vt didici a
mercatoribus, & distinguitur quasi in duas partes. circa medium enim eius
sunt qua prouincia terra, vna ad aquilonem, & alia ad meridiem. illa qua
est ad meridiem dicitur synopolis; & est castrum & portus soldani turchia.
qua vero ad aquilonem est, est prouincia quadam, qua nunc dicitur a latinis
gasaria, a gracis vero qui inhabitant eam super littus maris dicitur
cassaria, hoc est casaria. et sunt promontoria quadam extendentia se in
mare, & contra meridiem versus synopolim. et sunt trecenta milliaria inter
synopolim & cassariam. ita quod sint septingenta milliaria ab istis punctis
versus constantinopolim in longum et latum: et septingenta versus orientem:
hoc est, hiberiam, qua est prouincia georgia. ad prouinciam gasaria siue
casaria applicuimus, qua est quasi triangularis, ad occidentem habens
ciuitatem, qua dicitur kersoua in qua fuit sanctus clemens marterizatus. et
nauigantes coram ea vidimus insulam in qua est templum illud quod dicitur
angelicis manibus praparatum. [sidenote: soldaia.] in medio vero quasi in
cuspide ad meridiem habet ciuitatem qua dicitur soldaia, qua ex transuerso
respicit synopolim: et illuc applicant omnes mercatores venientes de
turchia volentes ire ad terras aquilonares, et e contrario venientes de
russia et terris aquilonaribus, volentes transire in turchiam. illi portant
varium et grisiam, et alias pelles pretiosas. alij portant telas de cottone
siue bombasio, et pannos sericos et species aromaticas. [sidenote: matriga
ciuitas.] ad orientem vero illius prouincia est ciuitas qua dicitur
matriga, vbi cadit fluuius tanais in mare ponti per orificium habens
latitudinem duodecem milliarium. ille enim fluuius antequam ingrediatur
mare ponti, facit quoddam mare versus aquilonem, habens in latitudine et
longitudine septinginta, milliaria, nusquam habens profunditatem vltra sex
passus, vnde magna vasa non ingrediuntur illud. sed mercatores de
constantinopoli applicantes ad pradictam ciuitatem matertam, mittunt barcas
suas vsque ad flumen tanaim, vt emant pisces siccatos, sturiones, thosas,
borbatos, et alios pisces infinita multitudinis. pradicta vero prouincia
cassaria cingitur mari in tribus lateribus: ad occidentem scilicet, vbi est
kersoua ciuitas clementis, ad meridiem vbi est ciuitas soldaia, ad quam
applicuimus, qua est cuspis prouincia, et ad orientem maricandis, vbi est
ciuitas materta, et orificium tanais. [sidenote: zikia.] vltra illud
orificium est zikia, qua non obedit tartaris: et sueui et hiberi ad
orientem, qui non obediunt tartaris. postea versus meridiem est trapesunda
qua habet proprium dominum nomine guidonem, qui est de genere imperatorum
constantinopolitanorum, qui obedit tartaris: postea synopolis qua est
soldani turchia qui similiter obedit: postea terra vastacij cuius filius
dicitur astar ab auo materno, qui non obedit. ab orificio tanaius versus
occidentem vsque ad danubium totum est subditum. etiam vltra danubium
versus constantinopolim, valakia, qua est terra assani, et minor bulgaria
vsque in solonomam omnes soluunt eis tributum. et etiam vltra tributum
condictum sumpserunt annis nuper transactis de qualibet domo securim vnam,
et totum frumentum quod inuenerunt in massa. applicuimus ergo soldaia in
12. kalendas iunij: et prauenerant nos quidam mercatores de
constantinopoli, qui dixerunt venturos illuc nuncios de terra sancta
volentes ire ad sartach. ego tamen pradicaueram publice in ramis palmarum
apud sanctam sophiam, quod non essem nuncius, nec vester, nec alicuius, sed
ibam apud illos incredulos secundum regulam nostram. tunc cum applicuissem,
monebant me dicti mercatores vt caute loquerer, quia dixerunt me esse
nuncium, et si non dicerem me esse nuncium, quod non praberetur mihi
transitus. tunc loquutus sum hoc modo ad capitaneos ciuitatis, imo ad
vicarios capitaneorum, quia capitanei iuerant ad baatu portantes tributum,
et non fuerant adhuc reuersi. nos audiuimus, dixi, de domino vestro sartach
in terra sancta quod esset christianus: et gauisi sunt inde vehementer
christiani, et pracipue dominus rex francorum christianissimus, qui ibi
peregrinatur, et pugnat contra saracenos, vt eripiat loca sancta de manibus
eorum: vnde volo ire ad sartach, et portare ei literas domini regis, in
quibus monet eum de vtilitate totius christianitatis. et ipsi receperunt
nos gratanter, et dederunt nobis hospitium in ecclesia episcopali. et
episcopus ipsius ecclesia fuerat ad sartach, qui multa bona dixit mihi de
sartach, qua ego postea non inueni. tunc dederunt nobis optionem vtrum
vellemus habere bigas cum bobus ad portandum res nostras vel equos pro
summarijs. et mercatores constantinopolitani consuluerunt mihi quod non
acciperem bigas, imo quod emerem proprias bigas coopertas, in quibus
apportant ruteni pelles suas, et in illis includerem res nostras quas
vellem quotidie deponere, quia si acciperem equos, oporteret me in qualibet
herbergia deponere et reponere super alios, et praterea equitarem lentiori
gressu iuxta boues. et tunc acquieui consilio eorum malo, tum quia fui in
itinere vsque sartach duobus mensibus, quod potuissem vno mense fecisse, si
iuissem equis. attuleram mecum de constantinopoli fructus et vinum
muscatum, et biscoctum delicatum de consilio mercatorum ad prasentandum
capitaneis primis, vt facilius pateret mihi transitus; quia nullus apud eos
respicitur rectis oculis, qui venit vacua manu. qua omnia posui in vna
biga, quando non inueni ibi capitaneos ciuitatis, quia dicebant mihi, quod
grattissima forent sartach, si possem deferre ea vsque ad eum. arripuimus
ergo iter tunc circa kalend. iunij cum bigis nostris quatuor coopertis et
cum alijis duabus quas accepimus ab eis, in quibus portabantur lectisternia
ad dormiendum de nocte, et quinque equos dabant nobis ad equitandum. eramus
enim quinque persona. ego et socius meus frater bartholomeus de cremona, et
goset later prasentium, et homo dei turgemannus, et puer nicolaus, quam
emeram constantinopoli de nostra eleemosyna. dederunt etiam duos homines
qui ducebant bigas et custodiebant boues et equos. sunt autem alta
promontoria super mare a kersoua vsque ad orificium tanais: et sunt
quadraginta castella inter kersouam et soldaiam, quorum quodlibet fere
habet proprium idioma: inter quos erant multi goti, quorum idioma est
teutonicum. post illa montana versus aquilonem est pulcherrima sylua in
planicie, plena fontibus et riuulis: et post illam syluam est planicies
maxima, qua durat per quinque dietas vsque ad extremitatem illius prouincia
ad aquilonem, qua coarctatur habens mare ad orientem et occidentem. ita
quod est vnum fossatum magnum ab vno mari vsque ad aliud. in illa planicie
solebant esse comani antequam venirent tartari, et cogebant ciuitates
pradictas et castra vt darent eis tributum. et cum venerunt tartari, tanta
multitudo comanorum intrauit prouinciam illam, qui omnes fugerunt vsque ad
ripam maris, quod comedebant se mutuo viui morientes: secundum quod
narrauit mihi quidam mercator, qui hoc vidit: quod viui deuorabant et
lacerabant dentibus carnes crudas mortuorum, sicut canes cadauera. versus
extremitatem illius prouincia sunt lacus multi et magni: in quorum ripis
sunt fontes salmastri, quorum aqua, qaam cito intrat lacum, efficit salem
durum ad modum glaciei. et de illis salinis habent baatu et sartach magnos
reditus: quia de toto russia veniunt illuc pro sale: et de qualibet biga
onusta dant duas telas de cottone valentes dimidiam ipperperam. veniunt, et
per mare multa naues pro sale, qua omnes dant tributum secundum sui
quantitatem. postquam ergo recessimus de soldaia, tertia die inuenimus
tartaros: inter quos cum intraueram, visum fuit mihi recte quod ingrederer
quoddam aliud saculum. quorum vitam et mores vobis describam prout possum.


the same in english.

the iournal of frier william de rubruquis a french man of the order of the
  minorite friers, vnto the east parts of the worlde. an. dom. 1253.

to his most soueraigne, & most christian lord lewis, by gods grace the
renowned king of france, frier william de rubruk, the meanest of the
minorites order, wisheth health and continual triumph in christ.

it is written in the booke of ecclesiasticus concerning the wise man:
[sidenote: ecclus. 39, ver. 4] he shall trauell into forren countries, and
good and euill shall he trie in all things. the very same action (my lord
and kinge) haue i atchieued: howbeit i wish that i haue done it like a wise
man, and not like a foole. for many there be, that performe the same action
which a wise man doth, not wisely but more vndiscreetly: of which number i
feare myselfe to be one. notwithstanding howsoeuer i haue done it, because
you commanded mee, when i departed from your highnes, to write all things
vnto you, which i should see among the tartars, and you wished me also that
i should not feare to write long letters, i haue done as your maiestie
inioined me: yet with feare and reuerence, because i want wordes and
eloquence sufficient to write vnto so great a maiestie. be it knowen
therefore vnto your sacred maiestie, that in the yere of our lord 1253,
about the nones of may, we entered into the sea of pontus, which the
bulgarians call the great sea. it containeth in length (as i learned of
certaine merchants) 1008 miles, and is in a maner, diuided into two parts.
about the midst thereof are two prouinces, one towards the north, and
another towards the south. the south prouince is called synopolis, and it
is the castle and porte of the soldan of turkie; but the north prouince is
called of the latines, gasaria: of the greeks, which inhabite vpon the sea
shore thereof, it is called cassaria, that is to say casaria. and there are
certaine head lands stretching foorth into the sea towards synopolis. also,
there are 300. miles of distance betweene synopolis and cassaria. insomuch
that the distance from those points or places to constantinople, in length
and breadth is about 700. miles: and 700. miles also from thence to the
east, namely to the countrey of hiberia which is a prouince of georgia.
[sidenote: gasaria.] at the prouince of gasaria or cassaria we arriued,
which prouince is, in a maner, three square, hauing a citie on the west
part thereof called kersoua, [footnote: kertch.] wherein s. clement
suffered martyrdome. and sayling before the said citie, we sawe an island,
in which a church is sayd to be built by the hands of angels. [sidenote:
soldaia.] but about the midst of the said prouince toward the south, as it
were, vpon a sharpe angle or point, standeth a citie called soldaia
[footnote: simferopol, i presume.] directly ouer against synopolis. and
there doe all the turkie merchants, which traffique into the north
countries, in their iourney outward, arriue, and as they retume homeward
also from russia, and the said northerne regions, into turkie. the foresaid
merchants transport thither ermines and gray furres, with other rich and
costly skinnes. others carrie cloathes made of cotton or bombast, and
silke, and diuers kindes of spices. [sidenote: the citie of matriga.] but
vpon the east part of the said prouince standeth a citie called matriga
[footnote: azou.], where the riuer tanais [footnote: the don.] dischargeth
his streames into the sea of pontus, the mouth whereof is twelue miles in
breadth. for this riuer, before it entreth into the sea of pontus, maketh a
little sea, which hath in breadth and length seuen hundreth miles,
[footnote: the sea of azou is 210 miles long, and its breadth varies from
10 to 100 miles.] and it is no place there of aboue sixe-paces deepe,
whereupon great vessels cannot sayle ouer it. howbeit the merchants of
constantinople, arriuing at the foresayd citie of materta [marginal note:
matriga.], send their barkes vnto the riuer of tanais to buy dried fishes,
sturgeons, thosses, barbils, and an infinite number of other fishes. the
foresayd prouince of cassaria is compassed in with the sea on three sides
thereof: namely on the west side, where kersoua the citie of saint clement
is situate: on the south side the citie of soldaia whereat we arriued: on
the east side maricandis, and there stands the citie of matriga vpon the
mouth of the riuer tanais. [sidenote: zikia.] beyond the sayd mouth
standeth zikia, which is not in subiection vnto the tartars: also the
people called sueui and hiberi towards the east, who likewise are not vnder
the tartars dominion. moreouer towards the south, standeth the citie of
trapesunda, [footnote: trebizond.] which hath a gouernour proper to it
selfe, named guydo being of the image of the emperours of constantinople,
and is subiect vnto the tartars. next vnto that is synopolis the citie of
the soldan of turkie, who likewise is in subiection vnto them. next vnto
these lyeth the countrey of vastacius, whose sonne is called astar, of his
grandfather by the mothers side, who is not in subiection. all the land
from the mouth of tanais westward as farre as danubius is vnder their
subiection. yea beyond danubius also, towards constantinople, valakia,
which is the land of assanus, and bulgaria minor as farre as solonia, doe
all pay tribute vnto them. and besides the tribute imposed, they haue also
of late yeares, exacted of euery houshold an axe, and all such corne as
they found lying on heapes. we arriued therefore at soldaia the twelfth of
the kalends of iune. and diuers merchants of constantinople, which were
arriued there before vs, reported that certaine messengers were comming
thither from the holy land, who were desirous to trauell vnto sartach.
notwithstanding i my self had publickely giuen out vpon palme sunday within
the church of sancta sophia, that i was not your nor any other mans
messenger, but that i trauailed vnto those infidels according to the rule
of our order. and being arriued, the said merchants admonished me to take
diligent heede what i spake: because they hauing reported me to be a
messenger, if i should say the contrary, that i were no messenger, i could
not haue free passage granted vnto me. then i spake after this maner vnto
the gouernors of the citie, or rather vnto their lieutenants, because the
gouernors themselues were gone to pay tribute vnto baatu, and were not as
yet returned. we heard of your lord sartach (quoth i) in the holy land,
that he was become a christian: and the christians were exceeding glad
thereof, and especially the most christian king of france, who is there now
in pilgrimage, and fighteth against the saracens to redeeme the holy places
out of their handes: wherfore i am determined to go vnto sartach, and to
deliuer vnto him the letters of my lord the king, wherein he admonisheth
him concerning the good and commoditie of all christendome. and they
receiued vs with gladnes, and gaue vs enterteinement in the cathedrall
church. the bishop of which church was with sartach, who told me many good
things concerning the saide sartach, which after i found to be nothing so.
then put they vs to our choyce, whither we woulde haue cartes and oxen, or
packehorses to transport our cariages. and the marchants of constantinople
aduised me, not to take cartes of the citizens of soldaia, but to buy
couered cartes of mine owne, (such as the russians carrie their skins in),
and to put all our cariages, which i would daylie take out, into them:
because, if i should vse horses, i must be constrained at euery baite to
take downe my cariages, and to lift them vp againe on sundry horses backs:
and besides, that i should ride a more gentle pace by the oxen drawing the
cartes. wherefore contenting my selfe with their euil counsel, i was
trauelling vnto sartach 2 moneths which i could haue done in one, if i had
gone by horse. i brought with me from constantinople (being by the
marchants aduised so to doe) pleasant fruits, muscadel wine, and delicate
bisket bread to present vnto the gouernours of soldaia, to the end i might
obtain free passage: because they looke fauorablie vpon no man which
commeth with an emptie hand. all of which things i bestowed in one of my
cartes, (not finding the gouernours of the citie at home) for they told me,
if i could carry them to sartach, that they would be most acceptable vnto
him. wee tooke oure iourney therefore about the kalends of iune, with fower
couered cartes of our owne and with two other which wee borrowed of them,
wherein we carried our bedding to rest vpon in the night, and they allowed
vs fiue horses to ride vpon. [sidenote: frier bartholomeus de cremona.] for
there were iust fiue persons in our companie: namely, i my selfe and mine
associate frier batholomew of cremona, and goset the bearer of these
presents, the man of god turgemannus, and nicolas, my seruant, whome i
bought at constantinople with some part of the almes bestowed vpon me.
moreouer, they allowed vs two men, which draue our carts and gaue
attendance vnto our oxen and horses. there be high promontories on the sea
shore from kersoua vnto the mouth of tanais. also there are fortie castles
betweene kersoua and soldaia, euery one of which almost haue their proper
languages: amongst whome there were many gothes, who spake the dutch
tongue. beyond the said mountaines towards the north there is a most
beautifull wood growing on a plaine ful of fountaines and freshets.
[sidenote: the necke of taurica chersonesus.] and beyond the wood there is
a mightie plaine champion, continuing fiue days iourney vnto the very
extremitie and borders of the said prouince northward, and there it is a
narrow isthmus or neck land, [footnote: the isthmus of perekop.] hauing sea
on the east and west sides therof, insomuch that there is a ditch made from
one sea vnto the other. in the same plaine (before the tartars sprang vp)
were the comanians wont to inhabite, who compelled the foresayd cities and
castles to pay tribute vnto them. but when the tartars came vpon them, the
multitude of the comanians entred into the foresaid prouince, and fled all
of them, euen vnto the sea shore, being in such extreame famine, that they
which were aliue, were constrained to eate vp those which were dead; and
(as a marchant reported vnto me who sawe it with his owne eyes) that the
liuing men deuoured and tore with their teeth, the raw flesh of the dead,
as dogges would knawe vpon carrion. towards the border of the sayd prouince
there be many great lakes: vpon the bankes whereof are salt pits or
fountaines, the water of which so soon as it entereth into the lake,
becommeth hard salte like vnto ice. and out of those salte pittes baatu and
sartach haue great reuenues: for they repayre thither out of all russia for
salte: and for each carte loade they giue two webbes of cotton amounting to
the value of half an yperpera. there come by sea also many ships for salt,
which pay tribute euery one of them according to their burden. the third
day after wee were departed out of the precincts of soldaia, we found the
tartars. [sidenote: the tartars.] amongst whome being entered, me thought i
was come into a new world. whose life and maners i will describe vnto your
hignes as well as i can.


de tartaris and domibus eorum. cap. 2.

nusquam habent manentem ciuitatem, sed futuram ignorant. inter se
diuiserunt scythiam, qua durat a danubio vsque ad ortum solis. et quilibet
capitaneus, secundum quod habet plures vel pauciores homines sub se, scit
terminos pascuorum suorum, et vbi debet pascere hyeme et astate, vere et
autumno. in hyeme enim descendunt ad calidiores regiones versus meridiem.
in astate ascendunt ad frigidiores versus aquilonem. loca pascuosa sine
aquis pascunt in hyeme quando est ibi nix, quia niuem habent pro aqua.
domum in qua dormiunt fundant super rotam de virgis cancellatis, cuius
tigna sunt de virgis, and [transcriber's note: sic.] conueniunt in vnam
paruulam rotam superius, de qua ascendit collum sursum tanquam
fumigatorium, quam cooperiunt filtro albo: et frequentius imbuunt etiam
filtrum calce vel terra alba et puluere ossium, vt albens splendeat, et
aliquando nigro. et filtrum illud circa collum superius decorant pulchra
varietate pictura. ante ostium similiter suspendunt filtrum opere
polimitario variatum. consumunt enim filtrum coloratum in faciendo vites et
arbores, aues et bestias. et faciunt tales domos ita magnas, quod habent
triginta pedes in latitudine. ego enim mensuraui semel latitudinem inter
vestigia rotarum vnius biga viginti pedum: et quando domus erat super bigam
excedebat extra rotas in vtroque latere quinque pedibus ad minus. ego
numeraui in vna biga viginti duos boues trahentes vnam domum: vndecem in
vno ordine secundum latitudinem biga, et alios vndecem ante illos: axis
biga erat magnus ad modum arboris nauis: et vnus homo stabat in ostio domus
super bigam minans boues. insuper faciunt quadrangulos de virgulis fissis
attenuatis ad quantitatem vnius arca magna: et postea de vna extremitate ad
aliam eleuant testudinem de similibus virgis, et ostiolum faciunt in
anteriori extremitate: et postea cooperiunt illam cistam siue domunculam
filtro nigro inbuto seuo siue lacte ouino, ne possit penetrari pluuia; quod
similiter decorant opere polimitario vel plumario. et in talibus arcis
ponunt totam suppellectilem suam et thesarum: quas ligant fortiter super
bigas alteras quas trahunt cameli, vt possint transuadare flumina. tales
arcas nunquam deponunt de bigis. quando deponunt domas suas mansionarias,
semper vertunt portam ad meridiem; et consequenter collocant bigas cum
arcis hinc et inde prope domum ad dimidium iactum lapidis: ita quod domus
stat inter duos ordines bigarum quasi inter duos muros. matrona faciunt
sibi pulcherrimas bigas, quas nescirem vobis describere nisi per picturam.
[marginal note: nota.] imo omnia depinxissem vobis si sciuissem pingere.
vnus diues moal siue tartar habet bene tales bigas cum arcis ducentas vel
centum. baatu habet sexdecem vxores: qualibet habet vnam magnam domum,
exceptis alijs paruis, quas collocant post magnam, qua sunt quasi camera;
in quibus habitant puella. ad quamlibet istarum domorum appendent ducenta
biga. et quando deponunt domus, prima vxor deponit suam curiam in capite
occidentali, et postea alia secundum ordinem suum; ita quod vltima vxor
erit in capite orientali: et erit spacium inter curiam vnius domina et
alterius, iactus vnius lapidis. vnde curia vnius diuitis moal apparebit
quasi vna magna villa: tunc paucissimi viri erunt in ea. vna muliercula
ducet 20. bigas vel 30. terra enim plana est. et ligant bigas cum bobus vel
camelis vnam post aliam: et sedebit muliercula in anteriori minans bouem,
et omnes alia pari gressu sequentur. si contingat venire ad aliquem malum
passum, soluunt eas et transducunt sigillatim: vadunt enim lento gressu
sicut agnus vel bos potest ambulare.


the same in english.

of the tartars, and of their houses. chap. 2.

they haue in no place any setled citie to abide in, neither knowe they of
the celestiall citie to come. they haue diuided all scythia among
themselues, which stretcheth from the riuer danubius euen vnto the rising
of the sunne. and euery of their captaines, according to the great or small
number of his people, knoweth the bound of his pastures, and where he ought
to feed his cattel winter and summer, spring and autumne. for in the winter
they descend vnto the warme regions southward. and in the summer they
ascend vnto the colde regions northward. in winter when snowe lyeth vpon
the ground, they feede their cattell vpon pastures without water, because
then they vse snow in stead of water. their houses wherein they sleepe,
they ground vpon a round foundation of wickers artificially wrought and
compacted together: the roofe whereof consisteth (in like sorte) of
wickers, meeting aboue into one little roundell, out of which roundell
ascendeth a necke like vnto a chimney, which they couer with white felte,
and oftentimes they lay mortar or white earth vpon the sayd felt, with the
powder of bones, that it may shine white. and sometimes also they couer it
with blacke felte. the sayd felte on the necke of their house, they doe
garnish ouer with beautifull varietie of pictures. before the doore
likewise they hang a felt curiously painted ouer. for they spend all their
coloured felte in painting vines, trees, birds, and beastes thereupon. the
sayd houses they make so large, that they conteine thirtie foote in
breadth. for measuring once the breadth betweene the wheele-ruts of one of
their cartes, i found it to be 20 feete ouer: and when the house was vpon
the carte, it stretched ouer the wheeles on each side fiue feete at the
least. i told 22. oxen in one teame, drawing an house vpon a cart, eleuen
in one order according to the breadth of the carte, and eleuen more before
them: the axeltree of the carte was of an huge bignes like vnto the mast of
a ship. and a fellow stood in the doore of the house, vpon the forestall of
the carte driuing forth the oxen. moreouer, they make certaine fouresquare
baskets of small slender wickers as big as great chestes: and afterward,
from one side to another, they frame an hollow lidde or couer of such like
wickers, and make a doore in the fore side thereof. and then they couer the
sayd chest or little house with black fell rubbed ouer with tallow or
sheeps milke to keepe the raine from soaking through, which they decke
likewise with painting or with feathers. and in such chests they put their
whole houshold stuffe and treasure. also the same chests they do strongly
binde vpon other carts, which are drawen with camels, to the end they may
wade through riuers. neither do they at any time take down the sayd chests
from off their carts. when they take down their dwelling houses, they turne
the doores alwayes to the south: and next of all they place the carts laden
with their chests, here and there, within half a stones cast of the house:
insomuch that the house standeth between two ranks of carts, as it were,
between two wals. [footnote: something in the style of the laagers of south
africa at the present day.] [sidenote: the benefite of a painter in strange
countries.] the matrons make for themselues most beautiful carts, which i
am not able to describe vnto your maiestie but by pictures onlie: for i
would right willingly haue painted all things for you, had my skill bin
ought in that art. one rich moal or tartar hath 200. or 100. such cartes
with chests. duke baatu hath sixteene wiues, euery one of which hath one
great house, besides other little houses, which they place behind the great
one, being as it were chambers for their maidens to dwel in. and vnto euery
of the said houses do belong 200. cartes. when they take their houses from
off the cartes, the principal wife placeth her court on the west frontier,
and so all the rest in their order: so that the last wife dwelleth vpon the
east frontier: and one of the said ladies courts is distant from another
about a stones cast. whereupon the court of one rich moal or tartar will
appeare like vnto a great village, very few men abiding in the same. one
woman will guide 20. or 30. cartes at once, for their countries are very
plaine, and they binde the cartes with camels or oxen, one behind another.
and there sittes a wench in the foremost carte driuing the oxen, and al the
residue follow on a like pace. when they chance to come at any bad passage,
they let them loose, and guide them ouer one by one: for they goe a slowe
pace, as fast as a lambe or an oxe can walke.


de lectis eorum et poculis. cap. 3.

postquam deposuerint domus versa porta ad meridiem, collocant lectum domini
ad partem aquilonarem. locus multerum est semper ad latus orientale hoc est
ad sinistrum domini domus cum sedet in lecto suo versa facie ad meridiem:
locus vero virorum ad latus occidentale, hoc est ad dextrum. viri
ingredientes domum nullo modo suspenderent pharetram ad partem mulierum. et
super caput domini est semper vna imago quasi puppa et statuuncula de
filtro, quam vocant fratrem domini: alia similis super caput domina, quam
vocant fratrem domina, affixa parieti: et superius inter vtramque illarum
est vna paruula, macilenta, qua est quasi custos totius domus. domina domus
ponit ad latus suum dextrum ad pedes lecti in eminenti loco pelliculam
hoedinam impletam lana vel alia materia, et iuxta illam statuunculam
paruulam respicientem famulas et mulieres. iuxta ostium ad partem mulieris
est iterum alia imago cum vbere vaccino, pro mulieribus qua mungunt vaccas.
de officio foeminarum est mungere vaccas. ad aliud latus ostij versus viros
est alia statua cum vbere equa pro viris qui mungunt equas. et cum
conuenerint ad potandum primo spargunt de potu illi imagini, qua est super
caput domini: postea alijs imaginibus per ordinem: postea exit minister
domum cum cipho et potu, et spargit ter ad meridiem, qualibet vice
flectendo genu; et hoc ad reuerentiam ignis: postea ad orientem ad
reuerentiam aeris: postea ad occidentem ad reuerentiam aqua; ad aquilonem
proijciunt pro mortuis. quando tenet dominus ciphum in manu et debet
bibere, tunc primo antequam bibat, infundit terra partem suam. si bibit
sedens super equum, infundit antequam bibat, super collum vel crinem equi.
postquam vero minister sic sparserit ad quatuor latera mundi, reuertitur in
domum et sunt parati duo famuli cum duobus ciphis et totidem patenis vt
deferant potum domino et vxori sedenti iuxta eum sursum in lecto. et cum
habet plures vxores, illa cum qua dormit in nocte sedet iuxta eum in die:
et oportet quod omnes alia veniant ad domum illam illa die ad bibendum: et
ibi tenetur curia illa die: et xenia qua deferuntur, illa deponuntur in
thesauris illius domina. bancus ibi est cum vtre lactis vel cum alio potu
et cum ciphis.


the same in english.

of their beds, and of their drinking pots. chap. 3.

hauing taken downe their houses from off their cartes, and turning the
doores southward, they place the bed of the master of the house, at the
north part thereof. the womens place is alwaies on the east side, namely on
the left hand of the good man of the house sitting vpon his bed with his
face southwards; but the mens place is vpon the west side, namely at the
right hand of their master. men when they enter into the house, wil not in
any case hang their quiuers on the womens side. ouer the masters head is
alwayes an image, like a puppet, made of felte, which they call the masters
brother: and another ouer the head of the good wife or mistresse, which
they call her brother being fastened to the wall: and aboue betweene both
of, them, there is a little leane one, which is, as it were the keeper of
the whole house. the good wife or mistresse of the house placeth aloft at
her beds feete, on the right hand, the skinne of a kidde stuffed with wooll
or some other matter, and neare vnto that a little image or puppet looking
towards the maidens and women. next vnto the doore also on the womens side,
there is another image with a cowes vdder, for the women that milke the
kine. for it is the duety of their women to milke kine. on the other side
of the doore next vnto the men, there is another image with the vdder of a
mare, for the men which milke mares. and when they come together to drinke
and make merie, they sprinckle parte of their drinke vpon the image which
is aboue the masters head: afterward vpon other images in order: then goeth
a seruant out of the house with a cuppe full of drinke sprinckling it
thrise towards the south, and bowing his knee at euery time: and this is
done for the honour of the fire. then perfourmeth he the like superstitious
idolatrie towards the east, for the honour of the ayre: and then to the
west for the honour of the water: and lastly to the north in the behalfe of
the dead. when the maister holdeth a cuppe in his hande to drinke, before
he tasteth thereof, hee powreth his part vpon the ground. if he drinketh
sitting on horse backe, hee powreth out part thereof vpon the necke or
maine of his horse before hee himselfe drinketh. after the seruaunt
aforesaide hath so discharged his cuppes to the fower quarters of the
world, hee returneth into the house: and two other seruants stand ready
with two cuppes, and two basons, to carrie drinke vnto their master and his
wife, sitting together vpon a bed. and if he hath more wiues than one, she
with whome hee slept the night before, sitteth by his side the daye
following: and all his other wiues must that day resorte vnto the same
house to drinke: and there is the court holden for that day: the giftes
also which are presented that daye are layd vp in the chests of the sayd
wife. and vpon a bench stands a vessell of milke or of other drinke and
drinking cuppes.


de potibus eorum et qualiter prouocant alios ad bibendum. cap. 4.

faciunt in hyeme optimum potum, de risio, de millio, de melle: claret sicut
vinum. et defertur eis vmum a remotis partibus. in astate non curant nisi
de cosmos. stat semper infra domum ad introitum porta, et iuxta illud stat
citharista cum citherula sua. citheras et vielas nostras non vidi ibi, sed
multa alia instrumenta, qua apud nos non habentur. et cum incipit bibere
tunc vnus mintstrorum exclamat alta voce, ha: et citharista per cutit
citharum. [sidenote: similiter in florida.] et quando faciunt festum
magnum, tunc omnes plaudunt manibus et saltant ad vocem cithara, viri coram
domino, et mulieres coram domina. et postquam dominus biberit, tunc
exclamat minister sicut prius, et tacet citharista: tunc bibunt omnes in
circuitu viri et mulieres: et aliquando bibunt certatim valde turpiter et
gulose. et quando volunt aliquem prouocare ad potum arripiunt eum per aures
et trahunt fortiter vt dilatent ei gulam, et plaudunt et saltant coram eo.
item cum aliqui volunt facere magnum festum et gaudium, vnus accipit ciphum
plenum, et alij duo sunt ei a dextris et sinistris: et sic illi tres
veniunt cantantes vsque ad illum cui debent porrigere ciphum, et cantant et
saltant coram eo: et cum porrigit manum ad recipiendum ciphum, ipsi subito
resiliunt, et iterum sicut prius reuertuntur, et sic illudunt ei ter vel
quater retrahendo ciphum, donec fuerit bene exhileratus et bonum habeat
appetitum, et tunc dant ei ciphum, et cantant et plaudunt manibus et terunt
pedibus donec biberit.


the same in english.

of their drinkes, and how they prouoke one another to drinking. chap. 4

in winter time they make excellent drinke of rise, of mill, and of honie,
being well and high coloured like wine. also they haue wine brought vnto
them from farre countries. in summer time they care not for any drinke, but
cosmos. and it standeth alwaies within the entrance of his doore, and next
vnto it stands a minstrell with his fidle. i sawe there no such citerns and
vials as ours commonly be, but many other musicall instruments which are
not vsed among vs. and when the master of the house begins to drinke, one
of his seruants cryeth out with a lowde voice ha, and the minstrell playes
vpon his fidle. [sidenote: they vse the like custome in florida.] and when
they make any great solemne feast, they all of them clap their hands and
daunce to the noyse of musique the men before their master and the women
before their mistresse. and when the master hath drunke, then cries out his
seruant as before, and the minstrell stayeth his musique. then drinke they
all around both men and women: and sometimes they carowse for the victory
very filthily and drunkenly. also when they will prouoke any man, they pul
him by the eares to the drinke, and lug and drawe him strongly to stretch
out his throate clapping their handes and dauncing before him. moreouer
when some of them will make great feasting and reioycing, one of the
company takes a full cuppe, and two other stand, one on his right hand and
another on his left, and so they three come singing to the man who is to
haue the cuppe reached vnto him, still singing and dauncing before him: and
when he stretcheth foorth his hand to receiue the cuppe, they leape
suddenly backe, returning againe as they did before, and so hauing deluded
him thrice or fower times by drawing backe the cuppe vntill he be merie,
and hath gotten a good appetite, then they giue him the cuppe, singing and
dauncing and stamping with their feete, vntill he hath done drinking.


de cibarijs eorum. cap. 5.

de cibis et victualibus eorum noueritis, quod indifferenter comedunt omnia
morticinia sua. et inter tot pecora et armenta non potest esse quin multa
animalia moriantur. tamen in astate quamdiu durat eis cosmos, hoc est lac
equinum, non curant de alio cibo. vnde tunc si contingat eis mori bouem vel
equum, siccant carnes scindendo per tenues pecias et suspendendo ad solem
et ventum, qua statim sine sale siccantur absque aliquo fatore. de
intestinis equorum faciunt andulges meliores quam de porcis; quas comedunt
recentes: reliquas carnes reseruant ad hyemem. de pellibus boum faciunt
vtres magnos, quos mirabiliter siccant ad fumum. de posteriori parte pellis
equi faciunt pulcherrimos soculares. de carne vnius arietis dant comedere
quinquaginta hominibus vel centum. scindunt enim minutatim in scutella cum
sale et aqua, aliam enim salsam non faciunt, et tunc cum puncto cultelli
vel furcinula, quas proprias faciunt ad hoc, cum qua solemus comedere pira
et poma cocta in vino, porrigunt cuilibet circumstantium buccellam vnam vel
duas, secundum multitudinem comedentium. dominus antequam proponitur caro
arietis in primo ipse accipit quod placet ei: et etiam si dat alicui partem
specialem, oportet quod accipiens comedat eam solus, et nemini licet dare
ei. si non potest totum comedere, asportat secum, vel dat garcioni suo, si
est presens, qui custodiat ei: sin aliter, recondit in saptargat suo, hoc
est in bursa quadrata, quam portant ad recondendum omnia talia, in qua et
ossa recondunt, quando non habent spacium bene rodendi ea, vt postea
rodant, ne pereat aliquid de cibo.


the same in english.

of their foode and victuals. chap. 5.

concerning their foode and victuals, be it knowen vnto your highnesse that
they do, without al difference or exception, eate all their dead carrions.
and amongst so many droues it cannot be, but some cattell must needes die.
howbeit in summer, so long as their cosmos, that is, their mares milke
lasteth, they care not for any foode. [sidenote: drying of flesh in the
wind.] and if they chance to haue an oxe or an horse dye, they drie the
flesh thereof: for cutting it into thin slices and hanging it vp against
the sunne and the wind, it is presently dried without salt, and also
without stenche or corruption. they make better puddings of their horses
then of their hogs, which they eate being new made: the rest of the flesh
they reserue vntill winter. they make of their oxe skins great bladders or
bags, which they doe wonderfully dry in the smoake. of the hinder part of
their horse hides they make very fine sandals and pantofles. they giue vnto
50. or an 100. men the flesh of one ram to eat. for they mince it in a
bowle with salt and water (other sauce they haue none) and then with the
point of a knife, or a little forke which they make for the same purpose
(such as wee vse to take rosted peares or apples out of wine withal) they
reach vnto euery one of the company a morsell or twaine, according to the
multitude of guestes. the master of the house, before the rams flesh be
distributed, first of all himselfe taketh thereof, what he pleaseth. also,
if he giueth vnto any of the company a speciall part, the receiuer therof
must eat it alone, and must not impart ought therof vnto any other. not
being able to eate it vp all, he caries it with him, or deliuers it vnto
his boy, if he be present, to keepe it: if not, he puts it vp into his
saptargat, that is to say, his foure square budget, which they vse to cary
about with them for the sauing of all such prouision, and wherein they lay
vp their bones, when they haue not time to gnaw them throughly, that they
may burnish them afterward, to the end that no whit of their food may come
to nought.


quomodo faciunt cosmos. cap. 6.

ipsum cosmos, hoc est lac iumentinum fit hoc modo. extendunt cordam longam
super terram ad duos palos fixos in terra, et ad illam cordam ligant
circiter horas tres, pullos equarum quas volunt mungere. tunc stant matres
iuxta pullos suos et permittunt se pacifice mungi. et si aliqua est nimis
indomita, tunc accipit vnus homo pullum et supponit ei permittens parum
sugere, tunc retrahit illum, et emunctor lactis succedit. congregata ergo
multitudine lactis, quod est ita dulce sicut vaccinum, dum est recens,
fundunt illud in magnum vtrem siue bucellam, et incipiunt illud concutere
cum ligno ad hoc aptato, quod grossum est inferius sicut caput hominis et
cauatum subtus: et quam cito concutiunt illud, incipit bullire sicut vinum
nouum, et acescere siue fermentari, et excutiunt illud donec extrahant
butirum. tunc gustant illud; et quando est temperate pungitiuum bibunt:
pungit enim super linguam sicut vinum raspei dum bibitur. et postquam homo
cessat bibere, relinquit saporem super linguam lactis amygdalini, et multum
reddit interiora hominis iucunda, et etiam inebriat debilia capita: multum
etiam prouocat vrinam. faciunt etiam cara-cosmos, hoc est nigrum cosmos ad
vsum magnorum dominorum, hoc modo. lac equinum non coagulatur. ratio enim
est: quod nullius animalis lac nisi cuius fetet venter non inuenitur
coagulum. in ventre pulli equi non inuenitur: vnde lac equa non coagulatur.
concutiunt ergo lac in tantum, quod omnino quod spissum est in eo vadat ad
fundum recta, sicut faces vini, et quod purum est remanet superius et est
sicut serum, et sicut mustum album. faces sunt alba multum, et dantur
seruis, et faciunt multum dormire. illud clarum bibunt domini: et est pro
certo valde suauis potus et bona efficacia. baatu habet 30. casalia circa
herbergiam suam ad vnam dietam, quorum vnam quodque qualibet die seruit ei
de tali lacte centum equarum, hoc est, qualibet die lac trium millium
equarum, excepto alio lacte albo, quod deferunt alij. sicut enim in syria
rustici dant tertiam partem fructuum, quam ipsi afferunt ad curias
dominorum suorum, ita et isti lac equarum tertia diei. de lacte vaccino
primo extrahunt butyrum et bulliunt illud vsque ad perfectam decoctionem,
et postea recondunt illud in vtribus arietinis quos ad hoc reseruant. et
non ponunt sal in butiro: tamen propter magnam decoctionem non putrescit;
et reseruant illud contra hyemem. residuum lac quod remanet post butirum
permittunt acescere quantum acrius fieri potest et bulliunt illud, et
coagulatur bulliendo, et coagulum illud desiccant ad solem, et efficitur
durum sicut scoria ferri. quod recondunt in saccis contra hyemem tempore
hyemali quando deficit eis lac, ponunt illud acre coagulum, quod ipsi
vocant gri-vt, in vtre, et super infundunt aquam calidam, et concutiunt
fortiter donec illud resoluatur in aqua; qua ex illo efficitur tota
acetosa, et illam aquam bibunt loco lactis. summe cauent ne bibant aquam
puram.


the same in english.

how they make their drinke called cosmos. chap 6.

their drinke called cosmos, which is mares milke, is prepared after this
manner. they fasten a long line vnto 2. posts standing firmely in the
ground, and vnto the same line they tie the young foles of those mares,
which they mean to milke. then come the dams to stand by their foles gently
suffering themselues to be milked. and if any of them be too vnruly, then
one takes her fole, and puts it vnder her, letting it suck a while, and
presently carying it away againe, there comes another man to milke the said
mare. and hauing gotten a good quantity of this milke together (being as
sweet as cowes milke) while it is newe they powre it into a great bladder
or bag, and they beat the said bag with a piece of wood made for the
purpose, hauing a club at the lower ende like a mans head, which is hollow
within: and so soone as they beat vpon it, it begins to boile like newe
wine, and to be sower and sharp of taste, and they beate it in that manner
till butter come thereof. then taste they thereof, and being indifferently
sharpe they drinke it: for it biteth a mans tongue like the wine of raspes,
when it is drunk. after a man hath taken a draught thereof, it leaueth
behind it a taste like the taste of almon milke, and goeth downe very
pleasantly, intoxicating weake braines: also it causeth vrine to be auoided
in great measure. likewise caracosmos, that is to say black cosmos, for
great lords to drink, they make on this maner. first they beat the said
milke so long till the thickest part thereof descend right downe to the
bottome like the lees of white wine, and that which is thin and pure
remaineth aboue, being like vnto whay or white must the said lees or dregs
being very white, are giuen to seruants, and will cause them to sleepe
exceedingly. that which is thinne and cleare their masters drinke: and in
very deed it is marueilous sweete and holesome liquor. duke baatu hath
thirty cottages or granges within a daies iourney of his abiding place:
euery one of which serueth him dayly with the caracosmos of an hundreth
mares milk, and so all of them together euery day with the milke of 3000.
mares, besides white milke which other of his subiects bring. for euen as
the husbandmen of syria bestow the third part of their fruicts and carie it
vnto the courts of their lords, euen so doe they their mares milke euery
third day. out of their cowes milke they first churne butter, boyling the
which butter vnto a perfect decoction, they put it into rams skinnes, which
they reserue for the same purpose. neither doe they salte their butter: and
yet by reason of the long seething, it putrifieth not: and they keepe it in
store for winter. the churnmilke which remaineth of the butter, they let
alone till it be as sowre as possibly it may be, then they boile it and in
boiling, it is turned all into curdes, which curds they drie in the sun,
making them as hard as the drosse of iron: and this kind of food also they
store vp in sachels against winter. in the winter season when milke faileth
them, they put the foresaid curds (which they cal gry-vt) into a bladder,
and powring hot water thereinto, they beat it lustily till they haue
resolued it into the said water, which is thereby made exceedingly sowre,
and that they drinke in stead of milke [footnote: presumably the first
mention of preserved milk in any form.]. they are very scrupulous, and take
diligent heed that they drinke not fayre water by it selfe.


de bestijs quas comedunt, et de vestibus, ac de venatione eorum. chap. 7.

magni domini habent casalia versus meridiem, de quibus afferunt eis milium
et farinam contra hyemem, pauperes procurant sibi pro arietibus et pellibus
commutando. sclaui etiam implent ventrem suum aqua crassa, et hac contenti
sunt. mures cum longis caudis non comedunt et omne genus murium habens
curtam caudam. sunt etiam ibi multa marmotes, quas ipsi vocant sogur; qua
conueniunt in vna fouea in hyeme 20. vel 30. pariter, et dormiunt sex
mensibus: quas capiunt in magna multitudine. sunt etiam ibi, cuniculi
habentes longam caudam sicut cari; et in summitate cauda habent pilos
nigros et albos. habent et multas alias bestiolas bonas ad comedendum: quas
ipsi valde bene discernunt. ceruos non vidi ibi; lepores paucos vidi,
gaselos multos. asinos syluestres vidi in magna multitudine, qui sunt quasi
muli. vidi et aliud genus animalis quod dicitur artak, quod habet recte
corpus arietis et cornua torta, sed tanta quantitatis, quod vix poteram vna
manu leuare duo cornua: et faciunt de cornibus illis ciphos magnos. habent
falcones, girfalcones, et herodios in magna multitudine: quos omnes portant
super manum dexteram: et ponunt semper falconi vnam corrigiam paruulam
circa collum, qua pendet ei vsque ad medietatem pectoris: per quam cum
proijciunt eum ad pradam, inclinant cum sinistra manu caput et pectus
falconis, ne verberetur a vento, vel ne feratur sursum. magnum ergo partem
victus sui acquirunt venatione. de vestibus et habitu eorum noueritis, quod
de cataya et alijs regionibus orientis, et etiam de perside et alijs
regionibus austri veniunt eis panni serici et aurei, et tela de bambasio,
quibus induuntur in astate. [sidenote: maior hungaria.] de russia, de
moxel, et maiore bulgaria et pascatir, qua est maior hungaria, et kersis:
(qua omnes sunt regiones ad aquilonem et plena syluis;) et alijs multis
regionibus ad latus aquilonare, qua eis obediunt, adducuntur eis pelles
preciosa multi generis; quas nunquam vidi in partibus nostris: quibus
induuntur in hyeme. et faciunt semper in hyeme duas pelliceas ad minus:
vnam, cuius pilus est ad carnem: aliam cuius pilus est extra contra ventum
et niues, qua multoties sunt de pellibus lupinis vel vulpibus vel
papionibus. et dum sedent in domo habent aliam delicatiorem. pauperes
faciunt illas exteriores de canibus et capris. quum volunt venari feras,
conueniunt magna multitudo et circundant regionem in qua sciunt feras esse,
et paulatim appropinquant sibi, donec concludant feras inter se quasi infra
circulum, et tunc sagitant ad eas; faciunt etiam braccas de pellibus.
diuites etiam furrant vestes suas de stupa seta, qua est supra modum
mollis, et leuis et calida. pauperes furrant vestes de tela de bambasio, de
delicatiori lana quam possunt extrahere: de grossiori faciunt filtrum ad
cooperiendum domos suas et cistas, et ad lectisternia. de lana etiam et
tertia parte pilorum equi admixta, faciunt cordas suas. de filtro etiam
faciunt pauellas sub sellis, et capas contra pluuiam. [sidenote: nota.]
vnde multum expendunt de lana. habitum virorum vidistis.


the same in english.

of the beastes which they eat, of their garments, and of their maner of
  hunting. chap. 7.

great lords haue cottages or granges towards the south, from whence their
tenants bring them millet and meale against winter. the poorer sort prouide
themselues of such necessaries, for the exchange of rams, and of other
beasts skins. the tartars slaues fil their bellies with thick water, and
are therewithall contented. they wil neither eate mise with long tailes,
nor any kinde of mise with short tailes. they haue also certaine litle
beasts called by them sogur, which lie in a caue twenty or thirty of them
together, al the whole winter sleeping there for the space of sixe moneths:
[footnote: marmosets] and these they take in great abundance. there are
also a kind of conies hauing long tayles like vnto cats: and on the outside
of their tailes grow blacke and white haires. they haue many other small
beasts good to eat, which they know and discerne right well. i saw no deere
there, and but a fewe hares but a great number of roes. i saw wild asses in
great abundance which be like vnto mules. also i saw another kind of beast
called artak, hauing in al resemblance the body of a ram and crooked
hornes, which are of such bignes, that i could scarce lift vp a paire of
them with one hand; and of these hornes they make great drinking cups.
[sidenote: our falconers vse the left first. another strange custome, which
i leaue to be scanned by falconers themselues.] they haue falcons,
girfalcons, and other haukes in great plenty all which they cary vpon their
right hands: and they put alwaies about their falcons necks a string of
leather, which hangeth down to the midst of their gorges, by the which
string they cast them off the fist at their game, with their left hand they
bow doune the heads and breasts of the sayd haukes, least they should be
tossed vp and downe, and beaten with the wind, or least they should soare
too high. wherefore they get a great part of their victuals, by hunting and
hauking. concerning their garments and attire be it knowen vnto your
maiestie, that out of cataya and other regions of the east, out of persia
also and other countries of the south, there are brought vnto them stuffes
of silke, cloth of gold, and cotton cloth, which they weare in time of
summer. but out of russia, moxel, bulgaria the greater, and pascatir, that
is hungaria the greater, and out of kersis (all which are northerne regions
and full of woods) and also out of many other countries of the north, which
are subiect vnto them, the inhabitants bring them rich and costly skins of
diuers sortes (which i neuer saw in our countries) wherewithal they are
clad in winter. and alwaies against winter they make themselues two gownes,
one with the fur inward to their skin, and another with the furre outward,
to defend them from wind and snow, which for the most part are made of
woolues skins, or fox skins, or els of papions. and when they sit within
the house, they haue a finer gowne to weare. the poorer sort make their
vpper gowne of dogs or of goats skins. when they goe to hunt for wild
beasts, there meets a great company together, and inuironing the place
round about, where they are sure to find some game, by litle and litle they
approach on al sides, til they haue gotten the wild beasts into the midst,
as it were into a circle, and then they discharge their arrowes at them.
also they make themselues breeches of skins. the rich tartars somtimes fur
their gowns with pelluce or silke shag, which is exceeding soft, light, and
warme. the poorer sort do line their clothes with cotton cloth which is
made of the finest wooll they can pick out, and of the courser part of the
said wool, they make felt to couer their houses and their chests, and for
their bedding also. [sidenote: great expense of wooll.] of the same wool,
being fixed with one third part of horse haire, they make all their
cordage. they make also of the said felt couerings for their stooles, and
caps to defende their heads from the weather: for all which purposes they
spend a great quantity of their wooll. and thus much concerning the attyre
of the men.


de rasura virorum et ornatu mulierum. cap. 8.

viri radunt in summitate capitis quadrangulum, et ab anterioribus angulis
ducunt rasuram crista capitis vsque ad tempora. radunt etiam tempora et
collum vsque ad summum concauitatis ceruicis: et frontem anterius vsque ad
frontinellam, super quam relinquunt manipulum pilorum descendentium vsque
ad supercilia. in angulis occipitis relinquunt crines, quibus faciunt
tricas, quas succingunt nodando vsque ad aures. et habitus puellarum non
differt ab habitu virorum, nisi quod aliquantulum est longior. sed in
crastino postquam est nupta radit caluariam suam a medietate capitis versus
frontem, et habet tunicam latam sicut cucullam monialis, et per omnia
latiorem et longiorem, fissam ante, quam ligat sub dextro latere. in hoc
enim differunt tartari a turcis: quod turci ligani tunicas suas ad
sinistram, tartari semper ad dextram. postea habent ornamentum capitis,
quod vocant botta, quod fit de cortice arboris vel alia materia, quam
possunt inuenire, leuiore: et est grossum et rotundum, quantum potest
duabus manibus complecti; longum vero vnius cubiti et plus, quadrum
superius, sicut capitellum vnius columna. istud botta cooperiunt panno
serico precioso; et est concauum interius: et super capitellum in medio vel
super quadraturam illam ponunt virgulam de calamis pennarum vel cannis
gracilibus longitudinis scilicet vnius cubiti et plus: et illam sibi
virgulam ornant superius de pennis pauonis, et per longum in circuitu
pennulis cauda malardi, et etiam lapidibus praciosis. diuites domina istud
ornamentum ponunt in summitate capitis quod stringunt fortiter cum almucia,
qua foramen habet in summitate ad hoc aptatum, et in isto recondunt crines
suos quos recolligunt a parte posteriori ad summitatem capitis quasi in
nodo vno et reponunt in illo botta, quod postea fortiter ligant sub
gutture. vnde quum equitant plures domina simul et videntur a longe,
apparent milites, habentes galeas in capitibus cum lanceis eleuatis. illud
enim botta apparet galea de super lancea. et sedent omhes mulieres super
equos sicut viti diuersificantes coxas; et ligant cucullas suas panno
serico aerij coloris super renes, et alia fascia stringunt ad mamillas: et
ligant vnam peciam albam sub occulis, qua descendit vsque ad pectus. et
sunt mulieres mira pinguedinis, et qua minus habet de naso pulchrior
reputatur. deturpant etiam turpiter pinguedine facies suas: nunquam cubant
in lecto pro puerperio.


the same in english.

of the fashion which the tartars vse in cutting their haire, and of the
  attire of their women. chap. 8.

the men shaue a plot foure square vpon the crownes of their heads, and from
the two formost corners they shaue, as it were, two seames downe to their
temples: they shaue also their temples and the hinder part of their head
euen vnto the nape of the necke: likewise they shaue the forepart of their
scalp downe to their foreheads, and vpon their foreheads they leaue a locke
of hayre reaching downe vnto their eye browes: vpon the two hindermost
corners of their heads, they haue two lockes also, which they twine and
braid into knots and so bind and knit them vnder each eare one. moreouer
their womens garments differ not from their mens, sauing that they are
somewhat longer. but on the morrowe after one of their women is maried,
shee shaues her scalpe from the middest of her head downe to her forehead,
and weares a wide garment like vnto the hood of a nunne, yea larger and
longer in all parts then a nuns hood, being open before and girt vnto them
vnder the right side. for herein doe the tartars differ from the turkes:
because the turkes fasten their garments to their bodies on the left side:
but the tartars alwaies on the right side. they haue also an ornament for
their heads which they call botta, being made of the barke of a tree, or of
some such other lighter matter as they can find, which by reason of the
thicknes and roundnes therof cannot be holden but in both hands together:
and it hath a square sharp spire rising from the top therof, being more
then a cubite in length, and fashioned like vnto a pinacle. the said botta
they couer al ouer with a piece of rich silke: and it is hollow within: and
vpon the midst of the sayd spire or square toppe, they put a bunch of quils
or of slender canes a cubite long and more: and the sayd bunch, on the top
thereof, they beautifie with peacocks feathers, and round about al the
length therof, with the feathers of a malards taile, and with precious
stones also. great ladies weare this kind of ornament vpon their heads
binding it strongly with a certain hat or coyfe, which hath an hole in the
crowne, fit for the spire to come through it: and vnder the fore-said
ornament they couer the haires of their heads, which they gather vp round
together from the hinder part therof to the crowne, and so lap them vp in a
knot or bundel within the said botta, which afterward they bind strongly
vnder their throtes. hereupon when a great company of such gentlewomen ride
together, and are beheld a far off, they seem to be souldiers with helmets
on their heads carrying their launces vpright: for the said botta appeareth
like an helmet with a launce ouer it. al their women sit on horsebacke
bestriding their horses like men: and they bind their hoods or gownes about
their wastes with a skie coloured silke skarfe, and with another skarfe
they girde it aboue their breasts: and they bind also a piece of white
silke like a mufler or mask vnder their eyes, reaching down vnto their
breast these gentlewomen are exceeding fat, and the lesser their noses be,
the fairer are they esteemed: they daube ouer their sweet faces with grease
too shamefully: and they neuer lie in bed for their trauel of childbirth.


de officio mulierum, et operibus earum, ac de nuptijs earum. cap. 9.

officium foeminarum est ducere bigas, ponere domus super eas et deponere,
mungere vaccas, facere butirum et griut, parare pelles, et consuere eas,
quas consuunt filo deneruis; diuidunt enim neruos in minuta fila, et postea
illa contorquent in vnum longum filum. consuunt etiam soculares et soccos
et alias vestes. vestes vero nunquam lauant, quia dicunt quod deus tunc
irascitur, et quod fiant torotrua si suspendantur ad siccandum: imo
lauantes verberant et eis auferunt. tonitrua supra modum timent: tunc omnes
extraneos emittunt de domibus suis; et inuoluunt se in filtris nigris, in
quibus latitant, donec transierit. nunquam etiam lauant scutellos, imo
carne cocta alueum in quo debent ponere eam lauant brodio bulliente de
caldaria, et postea refundunt in caldariam; faciunt et filtrum et
cooperiunt domos. viri faciunt solum arcus et sagittas, fabricant strepas,
et frana, et faciunt cellas, carpentant domos et bigas: custodiunt equos et
mungunt equas, concutiunt ipsum cosmos et lac equinum, faciunt vires in
quibus reconditur: custodiunt etiam camelos, et onerant eos oues et capras
custodiunt mixtim et mungunt aliquando viri, aliquando mulieres. [sidenote:
pellium paratio] de lacte ouium inspissato et salso parant pelles. cum
volunt manus vel caput lauare implent os suum aqua et paulatim fundunt de
ore suo super manus, et eadem humectant crines suos, et lauant caput suum.
de nuptijs eorum noueritis, quod nemo habet ibi vxorem nisi emat eam; vnde
aliquando sunt puella multum aduita ante quam nubant: semper enim tenent
eas parentes, donec vendant eas. seruant etiam gradus consanguinitatis
primum et secundum: nullum autem seruant affinitatis. habent enim simul vel
successiue duas sorores. nulla vidua nubit inter eos, hac ratione; quia
credunt quod omnes qui seruiunt eis in hac vita seruient in futura. vnde
vidua credunt, quod semper reuertitur post mortem ad primum maritum. vnde
accidit turpis consuetudo inter eos quod filius scilicet ducit aliquando
omnes vxores patris sui, excepta matre. curia enim patris et matris semper
accidit iuniori filio. vnde oportet quod ipse prouideat omnibus vxoribus
patris sui, quia adueniunt ea cum curia paterna. et tunc si vult vtitur eis
pro vxoribus, quia non reputat sibi iniuriam, si reuertatur ad patrem post
mortem. cum ergo aliquis fecerit pactum cum aliquo de filia accipienda,
facit pater puella conuiuium, et illa fuagit ad consanguineos, vt ibi
lateat: tunc pater dicit, ecce filia mea tua est, accipe eam vbicunque
inueneris: tunc ille quarit cum amicis suis, donec inueniat eam, et
oportet, quod vi capiat eam et ducat eam quasi violenter ad domum.

the same in english.

of the dueties inioined vnto the tartarian women, and of their labours, and
  also of their mariages. chap. 9.

the duties of women are, to driue carts: to lay their houses vpon carts and
to take them downe again: to milke kine: to make butter and gry-vt: to
dresse skins and to sow them, which they vsually sowe with thread made of
sinewes, for they diuide sinewes into slender threads, and then twine them
into one long thread. they make sandals and socks and other garments.
howbeit they neuer wash any apparel: for they say that god is then angry,
and that dreadful thunder wil ensue, if washed garments be hanged forth to
drie: yea, they beat such as wash and take their garments from them. they
are wonderfully afraid of thunder: for in the time of thunder they thrust
all strangers, out of their houses, and then wrapping themselues in black
felt, they lie hidden therein, til the thunder be ouerpast. they neuer wash
their dishes or bowles: yea, when their flesh is sodden, they wash the
platter wherein it must be put, with scalding hot broth out of the pot, and
then powre the said broth into the pot againe. they make felte also, and
couer their houses therewith. the duties of the men are to make bowes and
arrowes, stirrops, bridles and saddles, to build houses and carts, to keep
horses, to milke, mares, to churne cosmos and mares milke, and to make bags
wherein to put it, they keepe camels also and lay burthens vpon them. as
for sheepe and goates they tend and milke them, aswell the men as the
women. with sheeps milke thicked and salted they dresse and tan their
hides. when they wil wash their hands or their heads, they fil their
mouthes full of water, and spouting it into their hands by little and
little, they sprinckle their haire and wash their heades therwith.
[footnote: the same custom still exists amongst the inhabitants of the lena
delta] as touching mariages, your highnes is to vnderstand, that no man can
haue a wife among them till he hath bought her whereupon somtimes their
maids are very stale before they be maried, for their parents alwaies keepe
them till they can sel them. they keepe the first and second degrees of
consanguinitie inuiolable, as we do but they haue no regard of the degrees
of affinity: for they wil marrie together, or by succession, two sisters.
their widowes marie not at al, for this reason: because they beleeue, that
al who haue serued them in this life, shall do them seruice in the life to
come also. whereupon they are perswaded, that euery widow after death shal
returne vnto her own husband. and herehence ariseth an abominable and
filthy custome among them, namely that the sonne marieth somtimes all his
fathers wiues except his own mother: for the court or house of the father
or mother falleth by inheritance alwaies to the yonger son. whereupon he is
to prouide for all his fathers wiues, because they are part of his
inheritance aswel as his fathers possessions. and then if he will he vseth
then for his owne wiues: for he thinks it no iniurie or disparagement vnto
himselfe, although they returne vnto his father after death. therfore when
any man hath bargained with another for a maid, the father of the said
damosel makes him a feast: in the meane while she fleeth vnto some of her
kinsfolks to hide her selfe. then saith her father vnto the bridegrome:
loe, my daughter is yours, take her whersoeuer you can find her. then he
and his friends seek for her till they can find her, and hauing found her
hee must take her by force and cary her, as it were, violently vnto his
owne house.


de iusticijs eorum et iudicijs, et de morte ac sepultura eorum. cap. 10.

de iusticijs eorum nouentis, quod quando duo homines pugnant, nemo audet se
intermittere. etiam pater non audet iuuare filium. sed qui peiorem partem
habet, appellat ad curiam domini. et si alius post appellationem tangat
eum, interficitur. sed oportet quod statim absque dilatione vadat: et ille
qui passus est iniuriam ducit eum quasi captiuum. neminem puniunt capitali
sententia, nisi deprehensus fuerit in facto, vel confessus. sed quum
diffamatus est a pluribus, bene torquent eum, vt confiteatur. homicidium
puniunt capitali sententia, et etiam coitum cum non sua. non suam dico vel
vxorem vel famulam: sua enim sclaua licet vti prout libet. item enorme
furtum puniunt morte. pro leui furto, sicut pro vno ariete, dummodo non
fuerit sape deprehensus in hoc, verberant crudeliter. et si dant centum
ictus oportet quod habeant centum baculos, de illis dico, qui verberantur
sententia curia. item falsos nuncios, quia faciunt se nuncios et non sunt,
interficiunt. item sacrilegas, de quibus dicam vobis postea plenius, quia
tales reputant veneficas. quando aliquis moritur plangunt vehementer
vlulando: et tunc sunt liberi quod non dant vectigal vsque ad annum. et si
quis interest morti alicuius adulti non ingreditur domum ipsius mangucham
vsque ad annum. si paruulus est qui moritur, non ingreditur vsque post
lunationem. iuxta sepulturam defuncti semper relinquunt domum vnam. si est
de nobilibus, hoc est de genere chingis, qui fuit primus pater et domimis
eorum, illius qui moritur ignoratur sepultura: et semper circa loca illa
vbi sepeliunt nobiles suos est vna herbergia hominum custodientium
sepulturas. non intellexi quod ipsi recondunt thesaurum cum mortuis. comani
faciunt magnum tumulum super defunctum et erigunt ei statuam versa facie ad
orientem, tenentem ciphum in manu sua ante vmbelicum; fabricant et
diuitibus pyramides, id est domunculas acutas: et alicubi vidi magnas
turres de tegulis coctis: alicubi lapideas domos, quamuis lapides non
inueniantur ibi. vidi quendam nouiter defunctum, cui suspenderant pelles
sexdecem equorum, ad quodlibet latus mundi quatuor inter perticas altas: et
apposuerunt ei cosmos vt biberet, et carnes vt comederet: et tamen dicebant
de illo quod fuerat baptizatus. alias vidi sepulturas versus orientem.
areas scilicet magnas structas lapidibus, aliquas rotundas, aliquas
quadratas, et postea quatuor lapides longos erectos ad quatuor regiones
mundi circa aream. et vbi aliquis infirmatur cubat in lecto et ponit signum
super domum suam, quod ibi est infirmus, et quod nullus ingrediatur: vnde
nullus visitat infirmum nisi seruiens eius. quando etiam aliquis de magnis
curijs infirmatur, ponunt custodes longe circa curiam, qui infra illos
terminos neminem permittunt transire: timent enim ne mali spiritus vel
ventus veniant cum ingredientibus. ipsos diuinatores vocant tanquam
sacerdotes suos.


the same in english.

of their execution of iustice and iudgement: and of their deaths and
  burials. chap. 10.

concerning their lawes or their execution of iustice, your maiesty is to be
aduertised, and when two men fight, no third man dare intrude himself to
part them. yea, the father dare not help his owne sonne. but he that goes
by the worst must appeale vnto the court of his lord. and whosoeuer els
offereth him any violence after appeale, is put to death. but he must go
presently without all delay: and he that hath suffered the iniury, carieth
him, as it were captiue. they punish no man with sentence of death, vnles
hee bee taken in the deede doing, or confesseth the same. but being accused
by the multitude, they put him vnto extreame torture to make him confesse
the trueth. they punish murther with death, and carnall copulation also
with any other besides his owne. by his own, i meane his wife or his maid
seruant, for he may vse his slaue as he listeth himself. heinous theft also
or felony they punish with death. for a light theft, as namely for stealing
of a ram, the party (not being apprehended in the deed doing, but otherwise
detected) is cruelly beaten. and if the executioner laies on an 100.
strokes, he must haue an 100. staues, namely for such as are beaten vpon
sentence giuen in the court. also counterfeit messengers, because they
feine themselues to be messengers, when as indeed they are none at all,
they punish with death. sacrilegious persons they vse in like manner (of
which kind of malefactors your maiesty shall vnderstand more fully
hereafter) because they esteeme such to be witches. when any man dieth,
they lament and howle most pitifully for him: and the said mourners are
free from paying any tribute for one whole yeare after. also whosoeuer is
present at the house where any one growen to mans estate lieth dead, he
must not enter into the court of mangu-can til one whole yere be expired.
if it were a child deceased he must not enter into the said court til the
next moneth after. neere vnto the graue of the partie deceased they alwaies
leaue one cottage. if any of their nobles (being of the stock of chingis,
who was their first lord and father) deceaseth, his sepulcher is vnknowen.
and alwayes about those places where they interre their nobles, there is
one house of men to keep the sepulchers. i could not learn that they vse to
hide treasures in the graues of their dead. the comanians build a great
toomb ouer their dead, and erect the image of the dead party thereupon,
with his face towards the east, holding a drinking cup in his hand, before
his nauel. they erect also vpon the monuments of rich men, pyramides, that
is to say, little sharpe houses or pinacles: and in some places i saw
mighty towers made of brick, in other places pyramides made of stones,
albeit there are no stones to be found thereabout. i saw one newly buried,
in whose behalfe they hanged vp 16. horse hides, vnto each quarter of the
world 4, betweene certain high posts: and they set besides his graue cosmos
for him to drink, and flesh to eat: and yet they sayd that he was baptized.
i beheld other kinds of sepulchers also towards the east: namely large
flowres or pauements made of stone, some round and some square, and then 4.
long stones pitched vpright, about the said pauement towards the 4. regions
of the world. when any man is sicke, he lieth in his bed, and causeth a
signe to be set vpon his house, to signifie that there lieth a sicke person
there, to the end that no man may enter into the sayd house: whereupon none
at all visit any sicke party but his seruant only. moreouer, when any one
is sicke in their great courts, they appoint watchmen to stand round about
the said court, who wil not suffer any person to enter within the precincts
thereof. for they feare least euill spirits or winds should come together
with the parties that enter in. they esteeme of soothsayers, as of their
priests.


qualiter ingressi sunt inter tartaros, et de ingratitudine eorum. cap. 11.

quando ergo ingressi sumus inter illos barbaros, visum fuit mihi, vt dixi
superius, quod ingrederer aliud seculum. circumdederunt enim nos in equis
postquam diu fecerant nos expectare sedentes in vmbra sub bigis nigris.
prima quastio fuit, vtrum vnquam fuissemus inter eos; habito quod non:
inceperunt impudenter petere de cibarijs nostris, et dedimus de pane
biscocto et vino quod attuleramus nobiscum de villa: et potata vna lagena
vini, petierunt aliam, dicentes, quod homo non ingreditur domum vno pede;
non dedimus eis, excusantes nos quod parem haberemus tunc quasiuerunt vnde
veniremus, et quo vellemus ire; dixi eis superiora verba, quod audieramus
de sartach, quod esset christianus, et quod vellem ire ad eum, quia habebam
deferre ei literas vestras. ipsi diligenter quasiuerunt, vtrum irem de mea
voluntate, vel vtrum mitterer. ego respondi quod nemo coegit me ad eundum,
nec iuissem nisi voluissem: vnde de mea voluntate ibam, et etiam de
voluntate superioris me. bene caui, quod nunquam dixi, me esse nuncium
vestrum. tunc quasiuerunt quid esset in bigis, vtrum esset aurum vel
argentum, vel vestes preciosa, quas deferrem sartach. ego respondi, quod
sartach videret quid deferremus ei quando perueniremus ad eum; et quod non
intererat eorum ista quarere: sed facerent me deduci vsque ad capitaneum
suum, et ipse si vellet mihi prabere ducatum vsque ad sartach faceret: sin
minus, reuerterer. erat enim in illa prouincia vnus consanguineus baatu,
nomine scacatai, cui dominus imperator constantinopolitanus mittebat
literas deprecatorias, quod me permitteret transire. tunc ipsi
acquieuerunt, prabentes nobis equos et boues et duos homines, qui
deducerent nos. et alij qui adduxerant nos sunt reuersi. prius tamen
antequam pradicta darent, fecerunt nos diu expectare petentes de pane
nostro pro paruulis suis: et omnia qua videbant super famulos nostros,
cultellos, chirothecas, bursas, corrigias, omnia admirantes et volentes
habere. excusabam me, quia longa nobis restabat via, nec debebamus ita cito
spoliare nos rebus necessarijs ad tantam viam perficiendam. tunc dicebant
quod essem batrator. verum est quod nihil abstulerint vi: sed valde
importune et impudenter petunt qua vident. et si dat homo eis perdit, quia
sunt ingrati. reputant se dominos mundi, et videtur eis, quod nihil debeat
eis negari ab aliquo. si non dat, et postea indigeat seruicio eorum, male
ministrant ei. dederunt nobis bibere de lacte suo vaccino, a quo contractom
erat butirum, acetoso valde, quod ipsi vocant apram et sic recessimus ab
eis. et visum fuit mihi recte, quod euadissem de manibus damonum. in
crastino peruenimus ad capitaneum. ex quo recessimus a soldaia vsque ad
sartach in duobus mensibus nunquam iacuimus in domo nec in tentorio, sed
semper sub dio, vel sub bigis nostris, nec vidimus aliquam villam, vel
vestigium alicuius adificij vbi fuisset villa, nisi tumbas comanorum in
maxima multitudine. illo sero dedit nobis garcio qui ducebat nos bibere
cosmos; ad cuius haustum totus sudaui propter horrorem et nouitatem, quia
nunquam biberam de eo; valde tamen sapidum videbatur mihi, sicut vere est.


the same in english.

of our first entrance among the tartars, and of their ingratitude. chap.
  11.

and being come amongst those barbarous people, me thought (as i said
before) that i was entred into a new world: for they came flocking about vs
on horse back, after they had made vs a long time to awaite for them
sitting in the shadow, vnder their black carts. the first question which
they demanded was whether we had euer bin with them heretofore, or no? and
giuing them answere that we had not, they began impudently to beg our
victuals from vs. and we gaue them some of our bisket and wine, which we
had brought with vs from the towne of soldaia. and hauing drunke off one
flagon of our wine they demanded another, saying, that a man goeth not into
the house with one foote. howbeit we gaue them no more, excusing our selues
that we had but a litle. then they asked vs, whence we came, and whither we
were bound? i answered them with the words aboue mentioned: that we had
heard concerning duke sartach, that he was become a christian, and that
vnto him our determination was to trauel, hauing your maiesties letters to
deliuer vnto him. they were very inquisitiue to know whether i came of mine
own accord, or whether i were sent? i answered that no man compelled me to
come, neither had i come, vnles i my selfe had bin willing: and that
therefore i was come according to mine own wil, and to the will of my
superior. i tooke diligent heed neuer to say that i was your maiesties
ambassador. then they asked what i had in my carts; whether it were gold or
siluer, or rich garments to carie vnto sartach? i answered that sartach
should see what we had brought, when we were once come vnto him, and that
they had nothing to do to aske such questions, but rather ought to conduct
me vnto their captaine, and that he, if he thought good, should cause me to
be directed vnto sartach: if not, that i would returne. for there was in
the same prouince one of baatu his kinsmen called scacati, vnto whom my
lord the emperor of constantinople had written letters of request to suffer
me to passe through his territory. with this answere of ours they were
satisfied, giuing vs horses and oxen, and two men to conduct vs. howbeit
before they would allow vs the foresayd neccessaries for our iorney, they
made vs to awayt a long whyle, begging our bread for their yong brats,
wondering at all things which they sawe about our seruants, as their
kniues, gloues, purses, and points, and desiring to haue them. i excused my
self that we had a long way to trauel, and that we must in no wise so soon
depriue our selues of things necessary, to finish so long a iourney. then
they said that i was a very varlet. true it is, that they tooke nothing by
force from me: howbeit they will beg that which they see very importunatly
and shamelesly. and if a man bestow ought vpon them, it is but cost lost,
for they are thankles wretches. they esteeme themselues lords and think
that nothing should be denied them by any man. if a man giues them nought,
and afterward stands in neede of their seruice, they will do right nought
for him. they gaue vs of their cowes milke to drink after that butter was
cherned out of it, being very sower, which they cal apram. and so we
departed from them. and in very deed it seemed to me that we were escaped
out of the hands of diuels. on the morrow we were come vnto the captain.
from the time wherin we departed from soldaia, till we arriued at the court
of sartach, which was the space of two moneths, we neuer lay in house or
tent, but alwaies vnder the starry canopy, and in the open aire, or vnder
our carts. neither yet saw we any village, nor any mention of building
where a village had bin, but the graues of the comanians in great
abundance. the same euening our guide which had conducted vs, gaue vs some
cosmos. after i had drunke thereof i sweat most extreamly for the nouelty
and strangenes, because i neuer dranke of it before. notwithstanding me
thought it was very sauory, as indeed it was.


de curia scacatay, et quod christiani non bibunt cosmos. cap. 12.

mane ergo obuiauimus bigis scacatay onustis domibus. et videbatur mihi quod
obuiaret mihi ciuitas magna. mirabar etiam super multitudine armentorum
boum et equorum et gregum ouium: paucos videbam homines qui ista
gubernarent; vnde inquisiui quot homines haberet sub se? et dictum fuit
mihi, quod non plusquam quingentos, quorum medietatem transiueramus in alia
herbergia. tunc incepit mihi dicere garcio qui ducebat nos, quod aliquid
oporteret scacatay dare: et ipse fecit nos stare, et pracessit nuncians
aduentum nostrum. iam erat hora plusquam tertia, et deposuerunt domos suas
iuxta quondam aquam. et venit ad nos interpres ipsius, qui statim cognito,
quod nunquam fueramus inter illos, poposcit de cibis nostris, et dedimus
ei, poscebat etiam vestimentum aliquod, quia dicturas erat verbum nostrum
ante dominum suum. excusauimus nos. quasiuit quid portaremus domino suo?
accepimus vnum flasconem de vino, et impleuimus vnum veringal de biscocto
et platellum vnum de pomis et aliis fructibus. sed non placebat ei, quia
non ferebamos aliquem pannum pretiosum. sic tamen ingressi sumus cum timore
et verecundia. sedebat ipse in lecto suo tenens citharulam in manu, et vxor
sua iuxta eum: de qua credebam in veritate, quod amputasset sibi nasum
inter oculos vt simior esset: nihil enim habebat ibi de naso, et vnxerat
locum ilium quodam vnguento nigro, et etiam supercilia: quod erat
turpissimum in oculis nostris. tunc dixi ei verba supradicta. [sidenote:
nota diligenter.] vbique enim aportebat nos dicere idem verbum. super hoc
enim eramus bene pramoniti ab illis qui fuerant inter illos, quod nunquam
mutaremus verba nostra. rogaui etiam eum vt dignaretur accipere munusculum
de manu nostra, excusans me, quia monachus eram, nec erat ordinis nostri
possidere aurum, vel argentum, vel vestes preciosas. vnde non habebam
aliquid talium, quod possem ei dare: sed de cibis nostris acciperet pro
benedictione. tunc fecit recipi, et distribuit statim hominibus suis qui
conuenerant ad potandum. dedi etiam ei literas imperatoris
constantinopolitani: (hoc fuit in octauis ascensionis). qui statim eas
soldaiam misit vt ibi interpretarentur: quia erant in graco, nec habebat
secum qui sciret literas gracas. quasiuit etiam a nobis, si vellemus bibere
cosmos, hoc est, lac iumentinum. christiani enim ruteni, graci, et alani,
qui sunt inter eos, qui volunt stricte custodire legem suam, non bibunt
illud: imo non reputant se christianos postquam biberunt. et sacerdotes
eorum reconciliant eos, tanquam negassent fidem christianam. ego respondi,
quod habebamus adhuc sufficienter ad bibendum: et cum ille potus deficeret
nobis, oporteret nos bibere illud, quod daretur nobis. quasiuit etiam quid
contineretur in literis nostris, quas mittebatis sartach. dixi quod clausa
erant bulla nostra; et quod non erant in eis nisi bona verba et amicabilia.
quasiuit et qua verba diceremus sartach? respondi, verba fidei christiana.
quasiuit qua? quia libenter vellet audire. tunc exposui ei prout potui per
interpretem meum, qui nullius erat ingenij, nec alicuius eloquentia,
symbolum fidei. quo audito, ipse tacuit et mouit caput. tunc assignauit
nobis duos homines, qui nos custodirent, et equos et boues: et fecit nos
bigare secum, donec reuerteretur nuncius, quem ipse miserat pro
interpretatione, literarum imperatoris; et iuimus cum eo vsque in crastinum
pentecostes.


the same in english.

of the court of scacatai: and how the christians drinke no cosmos. chap.
  12.

on the morrowe after we met with the cartes of scacatai laden with houses,
and me thought that a mighty citie came to meete me. i wondered also at the
great multitude of huge droues of oxen, and horses, and at the flockes of
sheepe. i could see but a fewe men that guided all these matters: whereupon
i inquired how many men he had vnder him, and they told me that he had not
aboue 500. in all, the one halfe of which number we were come past, as they
lay in another lodging. then the seruant which was our guide told me, that
i must present somwhat vnto scacatay: and so he caused vs to stay, going
himselfe before to giue notice of our comming. by this time it was past
three of the clocke, and they vnladed their houses nere vnto a certain
water: and there came vnto vs his interpreter, who being aduertised by vs
that wee were neuer there before, demanded some of our victuals, and we
yeelded vnto his request. also he required of vs some garment for a reward,
because he was to interpret our sayings vnto his master. howbeit we excused
our selues as well as wee could. then he asked vs, what we would present
vnto his lord? and we tooke a flagon of wine, and filled a maund with
bisket, and a platter with apples and other fruits. but he was not
contented therewith, because we brought him not some rich garment.
notwithstanding we entred so into his presence with feare and bashfulnes.
he sate vpon his bed holding a citron in his hand, and his wife sate by
him: who (as i verily thinke) had cut and pared her nose betweene the eyes,
that she might seeme to be more flat and saddle-nosed: for she had left her
selfe no nose at all in that place, hauing annointed the very same place
with a black ointment, and her eye browes also: which sight seemed most
vgly in our eies. then i rehearsed vnto him the same wordes, which i had
spoken in other places before. for it stoode vs in hand to vse one and the
same speech in all places. [sidenote: a caueat right worthy the noting.]
for we were wel forewarned of this circumstance by some which had been
amongst the tartars, that we should neuer varie in our tale. then i
besought him, that he would vochsafe to accept that small gifte at our
hands, excusing my selfe that i was a monke, and that it was against our
profession to possesse gold, or siluer, or precious garments, and therefore
that i had not any such thing to giue him, howbeit he should receiue some
part of our victuals instead of a blessing. hereupon he caused our present
to be receiued, and immediately distributed the same among his men, who
were mette together for the same purpose, to drinke and make merrie. i
deliuered also vnto him the emperor of constantinople his letters (this was
eight dayes after the feast of ascension) who sent them forthwith to
soldaia to haue them interpreted there: for they were written in greeke,
and he had none about him that was skilfulle in the greeke tongue. he asked
vs also whether we would drink any cosmos, that is to say mares milke? (for
those that are christians among them, as namely the russians, grecians, and
alanians, who keep their own law very strictly, wil in no case drinke
thereof, yea, they accompt themselues no christians after they haue once
drunke of it, and their priests reconcile them vnto the church as if they
had renounced the christian faith.) i gaue him answere, that we had as yet
sufficient of our owne to drinke, and that when our drinke failed vs, we
must be constrained to drink such as should be giuen vnto vs. he enquired
also what was contained in our letters, which your maiestie sent vnto
sartach? i answered: that they were sealed vp, and that there was nothing
conteined in them, but good and friendly wordes. and he asked what wordes
wee would deliuer vnto sartach? i answered: the words of christian faith.
he asked again what these words were? for he was very desirous to heare
them. then i expounded vnto him as well as i could, by mine interpretor,
(who had no wit nor any vtterance of speech) the apostles creed. which
after he had heard, holding his peace, he shooke his head. then hee
assigned vnto vs two men, who shoulde giue attendance vpon our selues, vpon
our horses, and vpon our oxen. and hee caused vs to ride in his companie,
till the messenger whome hee had sent for the interpretation of the
emperours letters, was returned. and so wee traueiled in his companie till
the morowe after pentecost.


qualiter alani venerunt ad eos in vigilia pentecostes. cap. 13.

in vigilia pentecostes venerunt ad nos quidam alani, qui ibi dicuntur
[marginal note: vel akas.] acias, christiani secundum ritum gracorum;
habentes literas gracas et sacerdotes gracos: tamen non sunt schismatici
sicut graci; sed sine acceptione personarum venerantur omnem christianum:
et detulerunt nobis carnes coctas, rogantes vt comedremus de cibo eorum, et
oraremus pro quodam defuncto eorum. tunc dixi quod vigilia erat tanta
solennitatis, quod illa die non comederemus carnes. et exposui eis de
solennitate, super quo fuerunt multum gauisi; quia omnia ignorabant qua
spectant ad ritum christianum, solo nomine christi excepto. quasiuerunt et
ipsi et alij multi christiani, ruteni et hungari, vtrum possent saluari,
quia oportebat eos bibere cosmos, et comedere morticinia et interfecta a
saracenis et alijs infidelibus: qua etiam ipsi graci et ruteni sacerdotes
reputant quasi morticinia vel idolis immolata: quia ignorabant tempora
ieiunij: nec poterant custodire etiam si cognouissent. tunc rectificabar
eos prout potui, docens et confortans in fide. carnes quas detulerant
reseruauimus vsque ad diem festum: nihil enim inueniebamus venale pro auro
et argento, nisi pro telis et alijs [marginal note: nota diligentissime.]
pannis: et illos non habebamus. quum famuli nostri offerebant eis
ipperpera, ipsi fricabant digitis, et ponebant ad nares, vt odore,
sentirent, vtrum essent cuprum. nec dabant nobis cibum nisi lac vaccinum
acre valde et foetidum. vinum iam deficiebat nobis. aqua ita turbabatur ab
equis, quod non erat potabilis. nisi fuisset biscoctum quod habebamus, et
gratia dei, forte fuissemus mortui.


the same in english.

howe the alanians came vnto vs on pentecost or whitson euen. chap. 13.

vpon the euen of pentecost, there came vnto vs certaine alanians, wno are
called [marginal note: or akas.] acias, being christians after the maner of
the grecians, vsing greeke bookes and grecian priests: howbeit they are not
schismatiques as the grecians are, but without acception of persons, they
honour al christians. and they brought vnto vs sodden flesh, requesting vs
to eat of their meat, and to pray for one of their company being dead. then
i sayd, because it was the euen of so great and so solemne a feast day,
that we would not eate any flesh for that time. and i expounded vnto them
the solemnitie of the sayd feast, whereat they greatly reioyced: for they
were ignorant of all things appertayning to christian religion, except only
the name of christ. they and many other christians, both russians, and
hungarians demanded of vs, whether they might be saued or no, because they
were constrained to drinke cosmos, and to eate the dead carkases of such
things, as were slaine by the saracens, and other infidels? which euen the
greeke and russian priests themselues also esteeme as things strangled or
offered vnto idoles: because they were ignorant of the times of fasting,
neither could they haue obserued them albeit they had knowen them. then
instructed i them as well as i could and strengthened them in the faith. as
for the flesh which they had brought we reserued it vntill the feast day.
[sidenote: cloth is the chiefe marchandise in tartarie.] for there was
nothing to be sold among the tartars for gold and siluer, but only for
cloth and garments of the which kind of marchandise wee had none at all.
when our seruants offered them any coine called yperpera, they rubbed it
with their fingers, and put it vnto their noses, to try by the smell
whether it were copper or no. neither did they allow vs any foode but cowes
milke onely which was very sowre and filthy. there was one thing most
necessary greatly wanting vnto vs. for the water was so foule and muddy by
reason of their horses, that it was not meete to be drunk. and but for
certaine bisket, which was by the goodnes of god remaining vnto vs, we had
vndoubtedly perished.


de saraceno qui dixit se velle baptizari, et de hominibus qui apparent
  leprosi. cap. 14.

in die pentecostes venit ad nos quidam saracenus, qui cum loqueretur
nobiscum, incepimus exponere fidem. qui audiens beneficia dei exhibita
humano generi in incarnatione christi, et resurrectionem mortuorum, et
indicium futurum, et quod ablutio peccatorum esset in baptismo: dixit se
velle baptizari. et cum pararemus nos ad baptizandum eum, ipse subito
ascendit equum suum, dicens se iturum domum et habiturum consilium cum
vxore sua. qui in crastino loquens nobiscum, dixit quod nullo modo auderet
accipere baptisma, quia tunc non biberet cosmos. christiani enim illius
loci hoc dicebant, quod nullus verus christianus deberet bibere: et sine
potu illo non posset viuere in solitudine illa. a qua opinione nullo modo
potui diuertere illum. vnde noueritis pro certo quod multum elongantur a
fide propter illam opinionem qua iam viguit inter illos per rutenos, quorum
maxima multitude est inter eos. illa die dedit nobis ille capitaneus vnum
hominem, qui nos deduceret vsque ad sartach et duos qui ducerent nos vsque
ad proximam herbergiam; qua inde distabat quinque dietas prout boues
poterant ire. dederunt etiam nobis vnam capram pro cibo et plures vtres
lactis vaccini, et de cosmos parum: quia illud preciosum est inter illos.
et sic arripientes iter recte in aquilonem, visum fuit mihi quod vnam
portam inferni transissemus. garciones qui ducebant nos, incipiebant nobis
audacter furari, quia videbant nos parum cautos. tandem amissis pluribus
vexatio dabat nobis intellectum peruenimus tandem ad extremitatem illius
prouinca, qua clauditur vno fossato ab vno mari vsque ad aliud: extra quam
erat herbergia eorum apud quos intrassemus: videbantur nobis leprosi omnes:
[sidenote: salina.] quia erant viles homines ibi collocati, vt reciperent
tributum ab accipientibus sal a salinis superius dictis. ab illo loco, vt
dicebant, oportebat nos ambulare quindecim diebus, quibus non inueniremus
populum. cum illis bibimus cosmos: et dedimus illis vnum veringal plenum
fructibus et panem biscoctum. [sidenote: decem dieta.] qui dederunt nobis
octo boues, vnam captram pro tanto itinere, et nescio quot vtres plenos
lacte vaccino. sic mutatis bobus arripuimus iter, quod perfecimus decem
diebus vsque ad aliam herbergiam: nec inuenimus aquam in ilia via nisi in
fossis in conuallibus factis, exceptis duobus paruis fluminibus. et
tendebamus recte in orientem ex quo exiuimus pradictam prouinciam gasaria,
habentes mare ad meridiem et vastam solitudinem ad aquilonem: qua durat per
viginti dietas alicubi in latitudine; in qua nulla est sylua, nullus mons,
nullus lapis. herba est optima. in hac solebant pascere comani, qui
dicuntur capchat. a teutonicis vero dicuntur valani, et prouincia valania.
ab isidoro vero dicitur a flumine tanai vsque ad paludes meotidis et
danubium alania. et durat ista terra in longitudine a danubio vsque tanaim;
qui est terminus asia; et europa, itinere duorum mensium velociter
equitando prout equitant tartari: [sidenote: comania longitudo.] qua tota
inhabitabatur a comanis capchat, et etiam vltra a tanai vsque [marginal
note: etilia qua et volga flumen.] etiliam: inter qua flumina sunt decem
diete magna. [sidenote: russia.] ad aquilonem vero istius prouincia iacet
russia, qua vbique syluas habet, et protenditur a polonia et hungaria vsque
tanaim: qua tota vastata est a tartaris, et adhuc quotidie vastatur.
praponunt enim rutenis, quia sunt christiani, saracenos: et cum non possunt
amplius dare aurum vel argentum, ducunt eos et paruulos eorum tanquam
greges ad solitudinem vt custodiant animalia eorum. [sidenote: prussia.]
vltra russiam ad aquilonem est prussia, quam nuper subiugauerunt totam
fratres teutonici. et certe de facili acquierent russiam, si apponerent
manum. si enim tartari audirent, quod magnus sacerdos, hoc est, papa
faceret cruce signari contra eos, omnes fugerunt ad solitudines suas.


the same in english.

of a saracen which said that he would be baptized: and of certaine men
  which seemed to be lepers. chap. 14.

vpon the day of pentecost there came vnto vs a certain saracen, vnto whome,
as hee talked with vs, we expounded the christian faith. who (hearing of
god's benefits exhibited vnto mankind by the incarnation of our sauior
christ, and the resurrection of the dead, and the iudgement to come, and
that in baptisme was a washing away of sinnes) sayd that hee would be
baptized. but when we prepared our selues to the baptising of him, he
suddenly mounted on horsebacke, saying that he would goe home and consult
with his wife what were best to be done. and on the morrow after he told
vs, that he durst in no case receiue baptisme, because then he should
drinke no more cosmos. for the christians of that place affirme that no
true christians ought to drinke thereof: and that without the said liquor
he could not liue in that desert from which opinion, i could not for my
life remoue him. wherefore be it knowen of a certainty vnto your highnes,
that they are much estranged from the christian faith by reason of that
opinion which hath bin broached and confirmed among them by the russians,
of whom there is a great multitude in that place. the same day scacatay the
captaine aforesayd gaue vs one man to conduct vs to sartach, and two other
to guide vs vnto the next lodging, which was distant from that place fiue
dayes iourney for oxen to trauell. they gaue vnto vs also a goate for
victuals, and a great many bladders of cowes milke, and but a little
cosmos, because it is of so great estimation among them. and so taking our
iourney directly toward the north, me thought that wee had passed through
one of hell gates. the seruants which conducted vs began to play the bold
theeues with vs, seeing vs take so little heed vnto our selues. at length
hauing lost much by their theeuery, harme taught vs wisdome. and then we
came vnto the extremity of that prouince, which is fortified with a ditch
from one sea vnto another: without the bounds wherof their lodging was
situate. into the which, so soone as we had entred, al the inhabitants
there seemed vnto vs to be infected with leprosie: [sidenote: salt pits.]
for certain base fellowes were placed there to receiue tribute of al such
as tooke salt out of the salt pits aforesaid. from that place they told vs
that we must trauel fifteen daies iourney, before we shuld find any other
people. with them wee dranke cosmos, and gaue vnto them a basket full of
fruites and of bisket. and they gaue vnto vs eight oxen and one goate, to
sustaine vs in so great a iourney, and i knowe not how many bladders of
milke. [sidenote: ten dayes iorney.] and so changing our oxen, we tooke our
iourney which we finished in tenne dayes, arriuing at another lodging:
neither found wee any water all that way, but onely in certane ditches made
in the valleys, except two small riuers. and from the time wherein wee
departed out of the foresaid prouince of gasaria, we trauailed directly
eastward, hauing a sea on the south side of vs, and a waste desert on the
north, which desert, in some places, reacheth twenty dayes iourney in
breadth, and there is neither tree, mountaine, nor stone therein. and it is
most excellent pasture. here the comanians, which were called capthac, were
wont to feede their cattell. howbeit by the dutch men they are called
valani, and the prouince it selfe valania. [sidenote: the length of
comania.] but isidore calleth all that tract of land stretching from the
riuer of tanais to the lake of maotis, and so along as farre as danubius,
the countrey of alania. and the same land contunueth in length from
danubius vnto tanais (which diuideth asia from europe) for the space of two
moneths iourney, albeit a man should ride poste as fast as the tartars vse
to ride: and it was all ouer inhabited by the comanians, called capthac:
yea and beyond tanais, as farre as the riuer edil or volga: the space
betweene the two which riuers is a great and long iourney to bee trauailed
in ten dayes. [sidenote: russia.] to the north of the same prouince lieth
russia, which is full of wood in all places, and stretcheth from polonia
and hungaria, euen to the riuer of tanais: and it hath bene wasted all ouer
by the tartars, and as yet is daily wasted by them. they preferre the
saracens before the russians, because they are christians, and when they
are able to giue them no more golde or siluer, they driue them and their
children like flockes of sheepe into the wildernes, constraining them to
keepe their cattell there. [sidenote: prussia.] beyond russia lieth the
countrey of prussia, which the dutch knights of the order of saint maries
hospitall of ierusalem haue of late wholly conquered and subdued. and in
very deede they might easily winne russia, if they would put to their
helping hand. for if the tartars should but once know, that the great
priest, that is to say, the pope did cause the ensigne of the crosse to bee
displaied against them, they would flee all into their desert and solitarie
places. [footnote: there is some confusion in original edition, which i
have here corrected.]


de tedijs qua patiebantur, et de sepultura comanorum. cap. 15.

ibamus ergo versus orientem, nihil videntes nisi coelum et terram, et
aliquando mare ad dextram, quod dicitur mare tanais, et etiam sepulturas
comanorum, qua apparebant nobis a duabus leucis secundum quod solebant
parentela eorum sepeliri simul. quam diu eramus in solitudine bene erat
nobis: quod tadium quod patiebar quum veniebamus ad mansiones eorum non
possem exprimere verbis. volebat enim dux noster, quod ad quoslibet
capitaneos ingrederer cum xenio: et ad hoc non sufficiebant expensa.
quotidie enim eramus octo persona comedentes viaticum nostrum exceptis
seruientibus, qui omnes volebant comedere nobiscum. nos enim eramus
quinqui, et ipsi tres qui ducebant nos: duo ducentes bigas, et vnus iturus
nobiscum vsque ad sartach. carnes quas dabant non sufficiebant; nec
inueniebamus aliquid venale pro moneta. [sidenote: calor maximus ibi in
astate.] et cum sedebamus sub bigis notris pro vmbra, quia calor erat ibi
maximus illo tempore, ipsi ita importune ingerebant se nobis, quod
conculcabant nos, volentes omnia nostra videre. si arripiebat eos appetitus
purgandi ventrem, non elongabant se a nobis, quam possit faba iactari. imo
iuxta nos colloquentes mutuo faciebant immunditias suas: et multa alia
faciebant qua erant supra modum tadiosa. super omnia grauabat me, quod cum
volebam dicere eis aliquod verbum adificationis, interpres meus dicebat,
non facietis me pradicare: quia nescio talia verba dicere. et verum
dicebat. ego enim perpendi postea, quum incepi aliquantulum intelligere
idioma, quod quum dicebam vnum, ipse totum aliud dicebat, secundum quod ei
occurrebat. tunc videns periculum loquendi per ipsum, elegi magis facere.
[sidenote: tanais fluuius.] ambulauimus ergo cum magno labore de mansione
in mansionem: ita quod paucis diebus ante festum beata maria magdalena veni
ad fluuium magnum tanais: qui diuidit asiam ab europa, sicut nilus fluuius
agypti, asiam ab africa. [sidenote: casale rutenorum.] in illo loco quo
applicuimus fecerunt baatu et sartach fieri quoddam casale de rutenis in
ripa orientali, qui transferant nuncios et mercatores cum nauiculis. ipsi
transtulerunt nos primo et postea bigas ponentes vnam rotam in vna barca et
aliam in alia, ligantes barcas ad inuicem; et sic remigantes transibant.
ibi egit dux noster valde stulte. ipse enim credebat, quod illi de casali
deberent nobis ministrare equos, et dimisit animalia qua adduxeramus in
alia biga, vt redirent ad dominos suos. et quum postulauimus ab eis
animalia, ipsi respondebant quod habebant priuilegium a baatu, quod non
tenerentur ad aliud, nisi transferre euntes et redeuntes: etiam a
mercatoribus accipiebant magnum tributum. stetimus ergo ibi in ripa
fluminis tribus diebus. prima die dederunt nobis magnam borbatam recentem:
secunda die panem de siligine et parum de carnibus, quas acceperat
procurator villa ostiatim per diuersas domos. [sidenote: latitudo tanais.]
tertia die pisces siccos, quos habent ibi in magna multitudine. fluuius
ille erat ibi tanta latitudinus, quanta est sequana parisijis. et antequam
peruenissemus ad locum illum, transiuimus multas aquas pulcherrimas et
piscosissimas: sed tartari nesciunt eos capere, nec curant de pisce nisi
sit ita magnus, quod possunt comedere carnes eius, sicut carnes arietinas.
[sidenote: oceanus.] ille fluuius est terminus orientalis russia; et oritur
de paludibus qua pertingunt ad oceanum ad aquilonem. fluuius vero currit ad
meridiem in quoddam magnum mare septingentorum millium, antequam pertingat
ad mare ponti: et omnes aqua quas transiuimus vadunt ad illas partes. habet
etiam pradictum flumen magnam syluam in ripa occidentali. vltra locum illum
non ascendunt tartari versus aquilonem: quia tunc temporis [marginal note:
ad introitum augusti redeunt ad meridiem.] circa introitum augusti
incipiunt redire versus meridiem. vnde aliud est casale inferius vbi
transeunt nuncij tempore hyemali. eramus igitur ibi in magna angustia, quia
nec equos nec baues inueniebamus pro pecunia. tandem postquam ostendi eis,
quod laboraui pro communi vtilitate omnium christianorum, accommodauerunt
nobis boues et homines: nos autem oportebat ire pedibus. tunc temporis
metebant siliginem: triticum non proficiebat ibi bene. milium habent in
magna copia. mulieres rutena ornant capita sicut nostra. supertunicalia sua
exterius ornant vario vel grisio a pedibus vsque ad genua. homines portant
capas sicut teutonici: sed in capite portant pileos de filtro acutos in
summitate longo acumine. ambulauimus ergo tribus diebus non inuenientes
populum. et cum essemus valde fatigati et boues similiter, nec sciremus
quorsum possemus tartaros inuenire, accurrerunt subito duo equi, quos
recepimus cum gaudio magno, et ascenderunt eos dux noster et interpres, vt
specularentur quorsum possemus populum inuenire. tandem quarta die inuentis
hominibus gauisi sumus tanquam naufragi venientes ad portum. tunc acceptis
equis et bobus iuimus de mansione ad mansionem donec peruenimus vsque ad
herbergiam sartach secundo calendas augusti.


the same in english.

of our afflictions which we sustained: and of the comanians maner of
  buriall. chap. 15.

we therefore went on towards the east, seeing nothing but heauen and earth,
and sometimes the sea on our right hand, called the sea of tanais, and the
sepulchres of the comanians, which appeared vnto vs two leagues off, in
which places they were wont to burie their kinred altogether. so long as we
were trauelling through the desert, it went reasonably well with vs. for i
cannot sufficiently expresse in words the irkesome and tedious troubles
which i susteined, when i came at any of their places of abode. for our
guide would haue vs goe in vnto euery captaine with a present, and our
expenses would not extend so farre. for we were euery day eight persons of
vs spending our waifaring prouision, for the tartars seruants would all of
them eate of our victuals. we ourselues were fiue in number, and the
seruants our guides were three, two to driue our carts, and one to conduct
vs vnto sartach. the flesh which they gaue vs was not sufficient for vs:
neither could we finde any thing to be bought for our money. [sidenote:
extreme heate in sommer.] and as we sate vnder our carts in the coole
shadowe, by reason of the extreame and vehement heate which was there at
that time, they did so importunately and shamelesly intrude themselues into
our companie, that they would euen tread vpon vs, to see whatsoeuer things
we had. hauing list at any time to ease themselues, the filthy lozels had
not the maners to withdrawe themselues farther from vs, then a beane can
bee cast. yea, like vile slouens they would lay their tailes in our
presence, while they were yet talking with vs: many other things they
committed, which were most tedious and loathsome vnto vs. but aboue all
things it grieued me to the very heart, that when i would vtter ought vnto
them, which might tend to their edification, my foolish interpreter would
say: you shall not make me become a preacher now: i tell you, i cannot nor
i will not rehearse any such wordes. and true it was which he saide, for i
perceiued afterward, when i began to haue a little smattering in the
language, that when i spake one thing, he would say quite another,
whatsoeuer came next vnto his witlesse tongues end. [sidenote: tanaia.]
then seeing the danger i might incurre in speaking by such an interpreter,
i resolued much rather to holde my peace, and thus we traiueiled with great
toile from lodging to lodging, till at the length, a fewe dayes before the
feast of saint marie magdalene, we arriued at the banke of the mightie
riuer tanais which diuideth asia from europa, euen as the riuer nilus of
agypt disioyneth asia from africa. at the same place where wee arriued,
baatu and sartach did cause a certaine cottage to be built, vpon the
easterne bankeof of the riuer, for a companie of russians to dwelle in to
the ende they might transport ambassadoors and merchants in ferrie-boates
ouer that part of the riuer. first they ferried vs ouer, and then our
carts, putting one wheele into one lyter, and the other wheele into another
lyter, hauing bounde both the lyters together, and so they rowe them ouer.
in this place our guide played the foole most extreamely. for hee imagining
that the said russians, dwelling in the cottage, should haue prouided vs
horses, sent home the beasts which we brought with vs, in another cart,
that they might returne ynto their owne masters. and when we demanded to
haue some beasts of them, they answered, that they had a priuiledge from
baatu, whereby they were bound to none other seruice, but only to ferry
ouer goers and commers: and that they receiued great tribute of marchants
in regard therof. we staied therfore by the said riuers side three daies.
the first day they gaue vnto vs a great fresh turbut: the second day they
bestowed rye bread, and a litle flesh vpon vs, which the purueyer of the
village had taken vp at euerie house for vs: and the third day dried
fishes, which they haue there in great abundance. [sidenote: the breadth of
tanaia.] the saide riuer was euen as broad in that place, as the riuer of
the sein is at paris. and before we came there, we passed ouer many goodly
waters, and full of fish: howbeit the barbarous and rude tartars know not
how to take them: neither do they make any reckoning of any fish, except it
be so great, that they may pray vpon the flesh thereof, as vpon the flesh
of a ram. [sidenote: he is much deceiued.] the riuer is the limite of the
east part of russia, and it springeth out of the fennes of maotis, which
fennes stretch vnto the north ocean. and it runneth southward into a
certain great sea 700. miles about before it falleth into the sea called
pontus euximus. and al the riuers, which we passed ouer, ran with ful
stream into those quarters. the foresaid riuer hath great store of wood
also growing vpon the west side thereof. [sidenote: about the beginning of
august, the tartars returne southward.] beyond this place the tartars
ascend no farther vnto the north: for at that season of the yeere, about
the first of august, they begin to returne backe vnto the south. and
therefore there is another cottage somewhat lower, where passengers are
ferried ouer in winter time. and in this place wee were driuen to great
extremitie, by reason that we could get neither horses, nor oxen, for any
money. at length, after i had declared vnto them, that my comming was to
labour for the common good of all christians, they sent vs oxen and men;
howbeit we our selues were faine to trauel on foote. at this time they were
reaping their rye. wheat prospereth not wel in that soile. they haue the
seede of millium in great abundance. the russian women attire their heads
like vnto our women. they imbroder their safegards or gowns on the outside,
from their feet vnto their knees with particoloured or grey stuffe. the
russian men weare caps like vnto the dutch men. also they weare vpon their
heads certain sharpe, and high crowned hats made of felt much like vnto a
sugar loafe. then traueiled we 3. daies together, not finding any people.
and when our selues and our oxen were exceeding weary and faint, not
knowing how far off we should find any tartars, on the sudden, there came
two horses running towards vs, which we tooke with great ioy, and our guide
and interpreter mounted vpon their backes, to see, how far off they could
descry any people. at length vpon the fourth day of our iourney, hauing
found some inhabitants, we reioyced like sea faring men, which had escaped
out of a dangerous tempest, and had newly recouered the hauen. then hauing
taken fresh horses, and oxen, we passed on from lodging to lodging, till at
the last, vpon the second of the kalends of august, we arriued at the
habitation of duke sartach himselfe.


de regione sartach, et de gentibus illius. cap. 16.

regio ista vltra tanaim est pulcherrima, habens flumina et syluas
aquilonem. sunt sylua maxima, quas inhabitant duo genera hominum: moxel
scilicet, qui sunt sine lege, puri pagani. ciuitatem non habent sed casulas
in syluis. dominus eorum et magna pars eorum fuerunt interfecti in
alemania. tartari enim dux erant eos ad introitum alemania. vnde ipsi
multum commendant alemanos, sperantes quod adhuc liberabuntur per eos a
seruitute tartarorum. si mercator veniat ad eos, oportet quod ille apud
quem primo descendit prouideat ei quamdiu vult esse inter eos. si quis
dormiat cum vxore alterius, ille non curat nisi videat proprijs oculis:
vnde non sum zelotypi. abundant apud eos porei, mel, et cera, pelles
preciosa, et falcones. [sidenote: merdui saraceni.] post illos sunt alij
qui dicuntur merdas, quos latini vocant merduos, et sunt saraceni. post
illos est [marginal note: vel volga fluuius.] etilia, qua est maior
fiuuius, quam vnquam viderim: et venit ab aquilone de maiori bulgaria
tendens ad meridiem: et cadit in quendam lacum habentum spacium quatuor
mensium in circuitu, de quo postea dicam vobis. ista ergo duo flumina
tanais et etilia versus regiones aquilonis per quas transiuimus non distant
ab inuicem nisi decem dietis, sed ad meridiem multum diuiduntur ab inuicem.
tanais enim descendit in mare ponti: etilia facit pradictum mare siue
lacum, cum alijs multis fluminibus, qua cadunt in ilium de perside.
habebamus autem ad meridiem montes maximos in quibus habitant in lateribus
versus solitudinem illam cergis et alani siue [marginal note: kerkis. vel
aais.] acas, qui sunt christiani et adhuc pugnant contra tartaros.
[sidenote: lesgi saraceni.] post istos prope mare siue lacum etilia sunt
quidam saraceni qui dicuntur lesgi, qui similiter obediunt. post hos est
porta ferrea, quam fecit alexander ad excludendas barbaras gentes de
perside; de cuius situ dicam vobis postea, [marginal note: reditus eius per
derbent.] quia transiui per eam in reditu. et inter ista duo flumina in
illis terris per quas transiuimus habitabant comani antequam tartari
occuparent eas.


the same in english.

of the dominion of sartach, and of his subiects. chap. 16.

the region lying beyond tanais, is a very goodly countrey, hauing store of
riuers and woods toward the north part thereof. there be mighty huge woods
which two sorts of people do inhabite. [sidenote: the people of moxel are
pagans.] one of them is called moxel, being meere pagans, and without law.
they haue neither townes nor cities, but only cottages in the woods. their
lord and a great part of themselues were put to the sword in high germanie.
whereupon they highly commend the braue courage of the almans, hoping as
yet to be deliuered out of the bondage of the tartars, by their meanes. if
any merchant come vnto them, he must prouide things necessary for him, with
whom he is first of all enterteined, all the time of his abode among them.
if any lieth with another mans wife, her husband, vnles he be an eiewitnes
therof, regardeth it not: for they are not ielous ouer their wiues. they
haue abundance of hogs, and great store of hony and waxe, and diuers sorts
of rich and costly skins, and plentie of falcons. [sidenote: the people
called merdui being saracens.] next vnto them are other people called
merclas, which the latines cal merdui, and they are saracens. beyond them
is the riuer of etilia or volga, which is the mightiest riuer that euer i
saw. and it issueth from the north part of bulgaria the greater, and so
trending along southward, disimboqueth into a certain lake containing in
circuit the space of 4. moneths trauel, whereof i will speak hereafter.
[sidenote: the circuite of the caspian sea.] the two foresaid riuers,
namely tanais and etilia, otherwise called volga, towards the northren
regions through the which we traueiled, are not distant asunder aboue x.
daies iourney, but southward they are diuided a great space one from
another. for tanais descendeth into the sea of pontus. etitilia maketh the
foresaid sea or lake, with the help of many other riuers which fal therinto
out of persia. [sidenote: kergis or asa.] and we had to the south of vs
huge high mountains, vpon the sides wherof, towards the said desert, doe
the people called cergis, and the alani or acas inhabit, who are as yet
christians, and wage warre against the tartars. [sidenote: the saracens
called lesgi.] beyond them, next vnto the sea or lake of etilia, there are
certaine saracens called lesgi, who are in subiection vnto the tartars.
beyond these is porta ferrea, or the yron gate, nowe called derbent, which
alexander built to exclude the barbarous nations out of persia. [sidenote:
he returneth by derbent.] concerning the situation whereof, your maiestie
shall vnderstand more about the end of this treatise: for i trauailed in my
returne by the very same place. betweene the two foresaid riuers, in the
regions through the which we passed did comanians of olde time inhabite,
before they were ouerrun by the tartars.


de curia sartach et de gloria eius. cap. 17.

inuenimus ergo sartach prope etiliam per tres dietas: cuius curia valde
magna videbatur nobis: quia habet sex vxores, et filius eius primogenitus
iuxta eum duas vel tres: et qualibet habet domum magnam et bigas forte
ducentas. [sidenote: coiat nestorinus.] accessit autem doctor noster ad
quendam nestorinum coiat nomine, qui est vnus de maioribus curia sua. ille
fecit nos ire valde longe ad domini iannam. ita vocant illum qui habet
officium recipiendi nuncios. in sero pracepit nobis dictus coiat vt
veniremus ad eum. tunc incepit quarere ductor noster quid portaremus ei,
et coepit multum scandalizari, quum vidit quod nihil parabamus ad
portandum. stetimus coram eo, et ipse sedebat in gloria sua et faciebat
sonare citharam et saltare coram se. tunc dixi ei verba pradicta qualiter
veniremus ad dominum eius, rogans eum vt iuuaret nos vt dominus eius
videret literas nostras. excusaui etiam me quia monachus eram, non habens,
nec recipiens, nec tractans aurum vel argentum vel aliquid preciosum, solis
libris et capella in qua seruiebamus deo exceptis: vnde nullum xenium
afferebamus ei nec domino suo. qui enim propria dimiseram, non poteram
portator esse alienorum. tunc respondit satis mansuete, quod bene faciebam
ex quo eram monachus: sic seruarem votum meum, et non indigebat rebus
nostris; sed magis daret nobis de suis, si indigeremus: et fecit nos sedere
et bibere de lacte suo. et post pauca rogauit vt diceremus benedictionem
pro eo, quod et fecimus. quasiuit et quis esset maior dominus inter
francos. dixi, imperator, si haberet terram suam in pace. non, inquit, sed
rex francia, audiuerat enim de vobis a domino baldewyno de hannonia. inueni
etiam ibi vnum de socijs domus domimica. qui fuerat in cypro, qui
narrauerat omnia qua viderat. tunc reuersi sumus ad hospitium nostrum. in
crastino misi ei vnum flasconem de vino muscato, quod optime se custodierat
in tam longa via; et cophinom plenum biscocto quod fuit ei gratissimum, et
retinuit illo sero famulos nostros secum. in crastino mandauit mihi quod
venirem ad curiam; afferens literas regis et capellam et libros mecum, quia
dominus suus vellet videre ea; quod et fecimus, onerantes vnam bigam libris
et capella, et aliam pane et vino et fructibus. tunc fecit omnes libros et
vestes explicari, et circumstabant nos in equis multi tartari et christiani
et saraceni: quibus inspectis, quasiuit, si vellem ista omnia dare domino
suo, quo audito, expaui, et displicuit mihi verbum, dissimulans tamen
respondi, domine rogamus, quatenus dominus noster dignetur recipere panem
istum, vinum et fructus non pro xenio quia exiguum quid est, sed pro
benedictione, ne vacua manu veniamus coram eo. ipse autem videbit literas
domini regis, et per eas sciet, qua de causa venimus ad eum: et tunc
stabimus mandato eius nos et omnes res nostra. vestes enim sancta sunt, et
non licet eas contingere nisi sacerdotibus. tunc pracepit quod indueremus
nos ituri coram domino suo: quod et fecimus. ego autem indutus
preciosioribus vestibus accepi in pectore puluinar, quod erat valde
pulchrum, et biblium quod dederatis mihi, psalterium pulcherrimum, quod
dederat mihi domina regina, in quo erant pictura pulchra. socius meus
accepit missale et crucem, clericus indutus supercilicio accepit
thuribulum: sic accessimus ante dominum eius: et leuauerunt filtrum quod
pendebat ante ostium vt nos posset videre. tunc fecerunt flectere genua ter
clerico et interpreti: a nobis non requisiuerunt. tunc monuerant nos valde
diligenter, vt caueremus ingrediendo et egrediendo ne tangeremus limen
domus, et vt cantaremus aliquam benedictionem pro eo. tunc ingressi sumus
cantando, salue regina. in introitu, autem ostij stabat bancus cum cosmos
et cum ciphis. et conuenerant omnes vxores eius: et ipsi moal. ingredientes
nobiscum comprimebant nos. illic coiac tulit ei thuribulum cum incenso,
quod ipse respexit, tenens in manu diligenter: postea tulit ei psalterium
quod valde respexit, et vxor eius sedens iuxta eum. postea tulit biblium,
et ipse quasiuit, si euangelium esset ibi. dixi, etiam tota scriptura
sacra. accepit etiam crucem in manu sua, et quasiuit de imagine, vtrum
esset imago, christi? respondi quod sic. ipsi nestoriani et armeni nunquam
faciunt super cruces suas figuram christi. vnde videntur male sentire de
passione, vel erubescunt eam. postea fecit circumstantes nos retrahere se,
vt plenius posset videre ornamenta nostra. tunc obtuli ei literas vestras
cum transcriptis in arabico et syriano. feceram enim eas transferri in acon
in vtraque litera et lingua. et ibi erant sacerdotes armeni, qui sciebant
turcicum et arabicum, et ille socius domus domini qui sciebat syrianum, et
turcicum et arabicum. tunc exiuimus et deposuimus vestimenta nostra: et
venerunt scriptores et ille coiac, et fecerunt literas interpretari. quibus
auditis, fecit recipi panem et vinum et fructus: vestimenta et libros fecit
nos reportare ad hospitium. hoc actum est in festo sancti pietri ad
vincula.


the same in english.

of the court of sartach, and of the magnificence thereof. chap. 17.

and we found sartach lying within three daies iourney of the riuer etilia:
whose court seemed vnto vs to be very great. for he himselfe had sixe
wiues, and his eldest sonne also had three wiues: euery one of which women
hath a great house, and they haue ech one of them about 200. cartes.
[sidenote: coiat the historian.] our guide went vnto a certaine nestorian
named coiat, who is a man of great authoritie in sartachs court. he made vs
to goe very farre vnto the lordes gate. for so they call him, who hath the
office of enterteining ambassadours. in the euening coiac commanded vs to
come vnto him. then our guide began to enquire what we would present him
withal, and was exceedingly offended, when he saw that we had nothing ready
to present. we stoode before him, and he sate maiestically, hauing musicke
and dauncing in his presence. then i spake vnto him in the wordes before
recited, telling him, for what purpose i was come vnto his lorde, and
requesting so much fauour at his hands, as to bring our letters vnto the
sight of his lord. i excused my selfe also, that i was a monke, not hauing,
nor receiuing, nor vsing any golde, or siluer, or any other precious thing,
saue onely our bookes, and the vestiments wherein we serued god: and that
this was the cause why i brought no present vnto him, nor vnto his lord.
for i that had abandoned mine owne goods, could not be a transporter of
things for other men. then hee answered very courteously, that being a
monke, and so doing, i did well: for so i should obserue my vowe: neither
did himselfe stande in neede of ought that we had, but rather was readie to
bestowe vpon vs such thinge as we our selues stood in neede of: and he
caused vs to sit downe, and to drinke of his milke. and presently after he
requested vs to say our deuotions for him: and we did so. he enquired also
who was the greatest prince among the franckes? and i saide, the emperour,
if he could inioy his owne dominions in quiet. no (quoth he) but the king
of france. for he had heard of your highnes by lord baldwine of henault. i
found there also one of the knights of the temple, who had bene in cyprus,
and had made report of all things which he sawe there. then returned wee
vnto our lodging. and on the morow we sent him a flagon of muscadel wine
(which had lasted very wel in so long a iourney) and a boxe full of bisket,
which was most acceptable vnto him and he kept our seruants with him for
that euening. the next morning he commanded me to come vnto the court, and
to bring the kings letters and my vestiments and bookes with me: because
his lorde was desirous to see them. which we did accordingly, lading one
cart with our bookes and vestiments and another with bisket, wine, and
fruites. then he caused all our bookes and vestiments to bee laide forth.
and there stoode rounde about vs many tartars, christians and saracens on
horseback. at the sight whereof, he demanded whether i would bestow all
those things vpon his lord or no? which saying made me to tremble, and
grieued me full sore. howbeit, dissembling our griefe as well as we could,
we shaped him this answer: sir, our humble request is, that our lorde your
master would vouchsafe to accept our bread, wine, and fruits, not as a
present, because it is too meane, but as a benediction, least we should
come with an emptie hand before him. and he shall see the letters of my
souereigne lord the king, and by them he shall vnderstand for what cause we
are come vnto him and then both our selues, and all that we haue, shall
stand to his curtesie: for our vestiments be holy, and it is vnlawfull for
any but priests to touch them. then he commaunded vs to inuest our selues
in the said garments, that we might goe before his lord: and wee did so.
then i my selfe putting on our most precious ornaments, tooke in mine armes
a very faire cushion, and the bible which your maiesty gaue me, and a most
beautifull psalter, which the queenes grace bestowed vpon me, wherein there
were goodly pictures. mine associate tooke a missal and a crosse: and the
clearke hauing put on his surplesse, tooke a censer in his hand. and so we
came vnto the presence of his lord and they lifted vp the felt hanging
before his doore, that he might behold vs. then they caused the clearke and
the interpreter thrise to bow the knee: but of vs they required no such
submission. and they diligently admonished vs to take heed, that in going
in, and in comming out, we touched not the threshold of the house, and
requested vs to sing a benediction for him. then we entred in, singing
_salue regina_. and within the entrance of the doore, stood a bench with
cosmos, and drinking cups thereupon. and all his wiues were there
assembled. also the moals or rich tartars thrusting in with vs pressed vs
sore. then coiat caried vnto his lord the censer with incense, which he
beheld very diligently, holding it in his hand. afterward hee caried the
psalter vnto him, which he looked earnestly vpon, and his wife also that
sate beside him. after that he caried the bible: then sartach asked if the
gospel were contained therein? yea (said i) and all the holy scriptures
besides. he tooke the crosse also in his hand, and demanded concerning the
image, whether it were the image of christ or no? i said it was. the
nestorians and the armenians do neuer make the figure of christ vpon their
crosses. [sidenote: no good consequence.] wherefore either they seem not to
think wel of his passion, or els they are ashamed of it. then he caused
them that stood about vs, to stand aside, that he might more fully behold
our ornaments. afterward i deliuered vnto him your maiesties letters, with
translation therof into the arabike, and syriake languages. for i caused
them to be translated at acon into the character, and dialect of both the
saide tongues. and there were certain armenian priests, which had skil in
the turkish and arabian languages. the aforesaid knight also of the order
of the temple had knowledge in the syriake, turkish, and arabian tongues.
then we departed forth, and put off our vestiments, and there came vnto vs
certaine scribes together with the foresaid coiat, and caused our letters
to be interpreted. which letters being heard, he caused our bread, wine and
fruits to be receiued. and he permitted vs also to carie our vestiments and
bookes vnto our owne lodging. this was done vpon the feast of s. peter ad
vincula.


qualiter habuerunt in mandatis adire baatu patrem sartach. cap. 18.

in crastino mane venit quidam sacerdos frater ipsius coiac postulans
vasculum cum chrismate, quia sartach volebat illud videre, vt dicebat, et
dedimus ei. hora vespertina vocauit nos coiac, dicens nobis: dominus rex
scripsit bona verba domino meo: sed sunt in eis difficilia, de quibus nihil
auderet facere, sine consilio patris sui. vnde oportet vos ire ad patrem
suum, et duas bigas quas adduxistis heri cum vestimentis et libris
dimittetis mihi, quia dominus meus vult res diligentius videre. ego statim
suspicatus sum malum de cupiditate eius, et dixi ei. domine, non solum
illas sed etiam duas quas adhuc habemus relinquemus sub custodia vestra.
non inquit, illas relinquetis, de alijs facietis velle vestrum. dixi quod
hoc nullo modo posset fieri. sed totam dimitteremus ei. tunc quasiuit si
vellemus morari in terra? ego dixi, si bene intellexistis literas domini
regis, potestis scire, quod sic. tunc dixit, quod oporteret nos esse
patientes multum, et humiles. sic discessimus ab eo illo sere. in crastino
mane misit vnum sacerdotem nestorinum pro bigis, et nos duximus omnes
quatuor. tunc occurrens nobis frater ipsius coiacis, separauit omnia nostra
ab ipsis rebus quas tuleramus pridie ad curiam, et ilia accepit tanquam
sua, scilicet libros et vestimenta: et coiac praceperat, quod ferremus
nobiscum vestimenta quibus induti fueramus coram sartach vt illis
indueremur coram baatu si expediret: quas ille sacerdos abstulit nobis vi,
dicens: tu attulisti eas ad sartach, modo vis ferre baatu? et cum vellem ei
reddere rationem, respondit mihi, ne loquaris nimis, et vade viam tuam.
tunc necessaria fuit patientia, quia apud sartach, non patebat nobis
ingressus; nec aliquis erat, qui nobis exhiberet iusticiam. timebam etiam
de interprete, ne ipse aliquid aliter dixissit, quam ego dixissem ei: quia
ipsi bene voluisset, quod de omnibus fecissemus xenium. vnum erat mihi
solacium, quia quum persensi cupiditatem eorum, ego subtraxi de libris
biblium et sententias, et alios libros quos magis diligebam. psalterium
domina regina non fui ausus subtrahere, quia illud fuerat nimis notatum
propter aureas picturas qua erant in eo. sic ergo reuersi sumus cum duobus
residuis bigis ad hospitium nostrum. tunc venit ille, qui debebat ducere
nos ad baatu, volens cum festinatione arripere iter; cui dixi quod nulla
ratione ducerem bigas. quod ipse retulit ad coiac. tunc pracepit coiac quod
relinqueremus eas apud ipsum cum garcione nostro: quod et fecimus.
[sidenote: perueniunt ad etiliam vel volgam.] sic ergo euntes versus baatu
recta in orientem, tertia die peruenimus ad etiliam: cuius aquas cum vidi,
mirabar vnde ab aquilone descenderunt tanta aqua. antequam recederemus a
sartach, dixit nobis supradictus coiac cum alijs multis scriptoribus curia,
nolite dicere quod dominus noster sit christianus, sed moal. quia nomen
christianitatis videtur eis nomen cuiusdam gentis. [sidenote: tartari
volunt vocari moal.] in tantam superbiam sunt erecti, quod quamuis aliquid
forte credant de christo, tamen nolunt dici christiani volentes nomen suum,
hoc est, moal exaltare super omne nomen. nec volunt vocari tartari: tartari
enim fuerunt alia gens de quibus sic didici.


the same in english

how they were giuen in charge to goe vnto baatu the father of sartach.
  chap. 18.

the next morning betimes came vnto vs a certaine priest who was brother
vnto coiat, requesting to haue our box of chrisme, because sartach (as he
said) was desirous to see it: and so we gaue it him. about euentide coiat
sent for vs, saying: my lord your king wrote good words vnto my lord and
master sartach. howbeit there are certaine matters of difficulty in them
concerning which he dare not determine ought, without the aduise and
counsell of his father. and therfore of necessitie you must depart vnto his
father, leauing behind you the two carts, which you brought hither
yesterday with vestiments and bookes, in my custodie because my lorde is
desirous to take more diligent view thereof. i presently suspecting what
mischiefe might ensue by his couetousnes, said vnto him: sir, we will not
onely leaue those with you, but the two other carts also, which we haue in
our posession, will we commit vnto your custodie. you shall not (quoth he)
leaue those behinde you, but for the other two carts first named, we will
satisfie your request. i saide that this could not conueniently be done:
but needes we must leaue all with him. then he asked, whether we meant to
tarie in the land? i answered: if you throughly vnderstand the letters of
my lorde the king, you know that we are euen so determined. then he
replied, that we ought to be patient and lowly: and so we departed from him
that euening. on the morrowe after he sent a nestorian priest for the
carts, and we caused all the foure carts to be deliuered. then came the
foresaid brother of coiat to meet vs, and separated all those things, which
we had brought the day before vnto the court, from the rest, namely the
bookes and vestiments, and tooke them away with him. howbeit coiat had
commanded, that we should carie those vestiments with vs, which wee ware in
the presence of sartach, that wee might put them on before baatu, if neede
should require: but the said priest tooke them from vs by violence, saying:
thou hast brought them vnto sartach, and wouldest thou carie them vnto
baatu? and when i would haue rendred a reason, he answered: be not too
talkatiue, but goe your wayes. then i sawe that there was no remedie but
patience: for wee could haue no accesse vnto sartach himselfe, neither was
there any other, that would doe vs iustice. i was afraide also in regard of
the interpreter, least he had spoken other things then i saide vnto him:
for his will was good that we should haue giuen away all that we had. there
was yet one comfort remaining vnto me: for when i once perceiued their
couetous intent, i conueyed from among our bookes the bible, and the
sentences, and certaine other bookes which i made speciall account of.
howbeit i durst not take away the psalter of my soueraigne lady the queene,
because it was too wel known, by reason of the golden pictures therein. and
so we returned with the two other carts vnto our lodging. then came he that
was appointed to be our guide vnto the court of baatu, willing vs to take
our iourney in all posthaste: vnto whom i said, that i would in no case
haue the carts to goe with me. which thing he declared vnto coiat. then
coiat commaunded that we should leaue them and our seruant with him: and we
did as he commanded. [sidenote: they are come as farre as volga.] and so
traueling directly eastward towards baatu, the third day we came to etilia
or volga: the streams whereof when i beheld, i wondered from what regions
of the north such huge and mighty waters should descend. before we were
departed from sartach, the foresaid coiat, with many other scribes of the
court said vnto vs: doe not make report that our lord is a christian, but a
moal. [sidenote: the tartars will be called moal.] because the name of a
christian seemeth vnto them to be the name of some nation. so great is
their pride, that albeit they beleeue perhaps some things concerning
christ, yet will they not bee called christians, being desirous that their
owne name, that is to say, moal should be exalted aboue all other names.
neither wil they be called by the name of tartars. for the tartars were
another nation, as i was informed by them.


qualiter sartach, et mangucham et kencham faciunt reuerentiam christianis.
  cap. 19.

tempore quo franci ceperunt antiochiam tenebat monarchiam in illis
lateribus aquilonis quidam qui vocabatur concan. [sidenote: con can.] con
est proprium nomen: can nomen dignitatis quod idem est qui diuinator. omnes
diuinatores vocant can. vnde principes dicuntur can, quia penes eos spectat
regimen populi per diuinationem. vnde legitur in historia antiocha, quod
turci miserunt propter succursum contra francos ad regnum con can. de illis
enim partibus venerunt omnes turci. [sidenote: vnde venerunt turci.
caractay. oceanus.] iste con erat cara-catay. cara idem est quod nigrum.
catai nomen gentis. vnde cara-catay idem est quod nigri catay. et hoc
dicitur ad differentiam ipsorum catay qui erant in oriente super oceanum de
quibus postea dicam vobis. isti catay erant in quibusdam alpibus per quas
transiui. et in quadam planicie inter illas alpes erat quidam nestorinus
pastor potens et dominus super populum, qui dicebatur vayman [marginal
note: vel nayman.], qui erant christiani nestorini. [sidenote: presbyter
iohannes.] mortuo con can eleuauit se ille nestorius in regem, et vocabant
eum nestoriani regem iohannem: et plus dicebant de ipso in decuplo quam
veritas esset. ita enim faciunt nestoriani venientes de partibus illis. de
nihilo enim faciunt magnos rumores. vnde disseminauerunt de sartach quod
esset christianus, et de mangu can et ken can: quia faciunt maiorem
reuerentiam christianis, quam alijs populis, et tamen in veritate
christiani non sunt. sic ergo exiuit magna fama de illo rege iohanne. et
quando ego transiui per pascua eius, nullus aliquid sciebat de eo nisi
nestoriani pauci. [sidenote: kencham vbi habitauit frater andreas in curia
kencham. vut can, vel vne. caracarum villula. crit, et merkit.] in pascuis
eis habitat kencam, apud cuius curiam fuit frater andreas: et ego etiam
transiui per eam in reditu. huic iohanni erat frater quidam potens, pastor
similiter, nomine vut: et ipse erat vltra alpes ipsorum caracatay, distans
a fratre suo spacium trium hebdomadarum et erat dominus cuiusdam villula
qua dicitur caracarum, populum habens sub se, qui dicebantur crit, merkit,
qui erant christiani nestorini. sed ipse dominus eorum dimisso cultu
christi, sectabatur idola; habens sacerdotes idolorum, qui omnes sunt
inuocatores damonum et sortilegi. [sidenote: moal pauperimi homines.] vltra
pascua istius ad decem vel quindecem dictas erant pascua moal: qui erant
paupernmi homines sine capitaneo et sine lege, exceptis sortilegijs et
diuinationibus, quibus omnes in partibus illis intendunt. [sidenote:
tartarorum sedes.] et iuxta moal erant alij pauperes, qui dicebantur
tartari. rex iohannes mortuus fuit sine harede, et ditatus est frater eius
vnc: et faciebat se vocari can: et mittebantur armenta greges eius vsque ad
terminos moal. [sidenote: cyngis.] tunc temporis chingis faber quidam erat
in populo moal, et furabatur de animalibus vnc can quod poterat: in tantum
quod conquesti sunt pastores vut domino suo. tunc congregauit exercitum et
equitauit in terram moal, quarens ipsum cyngis. et ille fugit inter
tartaros et latuit ibi. tunc ipse vut accepta prada moal et a tartaris
reuersus est. tunc ipse cyngis allocutus est tartaros et ipsos moal dicens,
quia sine duce sumus opprimunt nos vicini nostri et fecerunt ipsum ducem et
capitaneum tartari et moal. tunc latenter congregato exercitu irruit super
ipsum vut, et vicit ipsum et ipse fugit in cathaiam. ibi capta fuit filia
eius, quam cyngis dedit vni ex filijs in vxorem, ex quo ipsa suscepit istum
qui nunc regnat mangu. [sidenote: mangu-can.] tunc ipse cyngis permittebat
vbique ipsos tartaros: et inde exiuit nomen eorum, quia vbique clamabatur,
ecce tartari veniunt. sed per crebra bella modo omnes fere deleti sunt.
vnde isti moal modo volunt extinguere illud nomen et suum eleuare.
[sidenote: mancherule] terra illa in qua primo fuerunt, et vbi est adhuc
curia cyngiscan, vocatur mancherule. sed quia tartari est regio circa quam
fuit acquisitio corum, illam ciuitatem habent pro regali, et ibi prope
eligunt suum can.


the same in english.

howe sartach, and mangu can, and ken can doe reuerence vnto christians.
  chap. 19.

at the same time when the french men tooke antioch, a certaine man named
con can had dominion ouer the northren regions, lying thereabouts. con is a
proper name: can is a name of authority or dignitie, which signifieth a
diuiner or soothsayer all diuiners are called can amongst them. whereupon
their princes are called can, because that vnto them belongeth the
gouernment of the people by diuination. wee doe reade also in the historie
of antiochia, that the turkes sent for aide against the french-men, vnto
the kingdome of con can. for out of those parts the whole nation of the
turkes first came. the said con was of the nation of kara-catay, kara
signifieth blacke, and katay is the name of a countrey. so that kara-catay
signifieth the blacke catay. [sidenote: an ocean sea.] this name was giuen
to make a difference between the foresaid people, and the people of catay,
inhabiting eastward ouer against the ocean sea: concerning whom your
maiesty shall vnderstand more hereafter. these catayans dwelt vpon certaine
alpes, by the which i trauailed. [sidenote: nayman. presbiter iohn.] and in
a certaine plane countrey within those alpes, there inhabited a nestorian
shepheard, being a mighty gouernour ouer the people called yayman, which
were christians, following the sect of nestorius. after the death of con
can, the said nestorian exalted himselfe to the kingdome, and they called
him king iohn, [marginal note: this history of presbiter iohn in the
north-east, is alledged at large by gerardus mercator in his generall
mappe. from whence the turkes first sprang.] reporting ten times more of
him then was true. for so the nestorians which come out of those parts, vse
to doe. for they blaze abroade great rumors, and reports vpon iust nothing.
whereupon they gaue out concerning sartach, that he was become a christian,
and the like also they reported concerning mangu can, and ken can namely
because these tartars make more account of christians, then they doe of
other people, and yet in very deede, themselues are no christians. so
likewise there went foorth a great report concerning the said king iohn.
howbeit, when i trauailed along by his territories, there was no man that
knew any thing of him, but onely a fewe nestorians. [sidenote: the place of
ken can his abode. vut can, or vnc can. the village of cara carum. crit and
merkit.] in his pastures or territories dwelleth ken can, at whose court
frier andrew was. and i my selfe passed by it at my returne. this iohn had
a brother, being a mightie man also, and a shepheard like himselfe, called
vut, and be inhabited beyond the alpes of cara catay, being distant from
his brother iohn, the space of three weekes iourney. he was lord ouer a
certain village, called cara carum, hauing people also for his subiects,
named crit, or merkit, who were christians of the sect of nestorius. but
their lorde abandoning the the worship of christ followed after idoles,
reteining with him priests of the saide idoles, who all of them are
worshippers of deuils and and sorcerers. [moal in olde time a beggerly
people.] beyond his pastures, some tenne or fifteene dayes iourney, were
the pasture of moal, who were a poore and beggerly nation, without
gouernour, and without lawe, except their soothsayings, and their
diuinations, vnto the which detestable studies, all in those partes doe
apply their mindes. [sidenote: the place of the tartars.] neere vnto moal
were other poore people called tartars. the foresaid king iohn died without
issue male, and thereupon his brother vut was greatly inriched, and caused
himselfe to be named can; and his droues and flockes raunged euen vnto the
borders of moal. [sidenote: cyngis] about the same time there was one
cyngis, a blacke smith among the people of moal. this cyngis stole as many
cattel from vut can as he could possibly get: insomuche that the shepherds
of vut complained vnto their lord. then prouided he an armie and marched vp
into the countrey of moal to seeke for the saide cyngis. but cyngis fledde
among the tartars and hidde himselfe amongest them. and vut hauing taken
some spoils both from moal and also from the tartars, returned home. then
spake cyngis vnto the tartars and vnto the people of moal, saying: sirs
because we are destitute of a gouernonr and captaine, you see howe our
neighbours do oppresses vs. and the tartars and moals appointed him to be
their chieftaine. then hauing secretly gathered together an armie, he brake
in suddenly vpon vut, and ouercame him, and vut fledde into cataua.
[sidenote: magnu-can.] at the same time was the daughter of vut taken,
which cyngis married vnto one of his sonnes, by whome she conceiued, and
brought forth the great can, which now reigneth called mangu-can. then
cyngis sent the tartars before him in al places where he came: and
thereupon was their name published and spread abroade for in all places the
people woulde crie out: loe, the tartars come, the tartars come. howbeit
through continuall warres, they are nowe all of them in a maner consumed
and brought to nought. whereupon the moals endeuour what they can, to
extinguish the name, of the tartars that they may exalt their owne name.
the countrey wherein they first inhabited and where the court of cyngis can
[sidenote: mancherule] as yet remaineth, is called macherule. but because
tartaria is the region about which they haue obtained their conquests, they
esteeme that as their royall and chiefe citie and there for the most part
doe they elect their great can.


de rutenis et hungaris, et manis, et de mari caspio. cap. 20.

de sartach autem vtrum credit in christum vel non nescio. hoc scio quod
christianus non vult dici. immo magis videtur mihi deridere christianos.
ipse enim est in itinere christianorum, scilicet rutenorum, blacorum,
bulgarorum minoris bulgaria soldainorum, kerkisorum, alanorum: qui omnes
transeunt per cum quum vidunt ad curiam patris sui deferre ei munera, vnde
magis amplectitur eos. tamen si saraceni veniant, et maius afferint cuius
expediuntur. habet etiam circa se nestorinos sacerdotes qui pulsant
tabulam, et cantant officium suum.

[sidenote: berta vel berca.] est alius qui dicitur berta super baatu, qui
pascit versus portam ferream, vbi est iter saracenorum omnium qui veniunt
de perside et de turchia, qui euntes ad baatu, et transeuntes per eum,
deferunt ei munera. et ille facit se saracenum, et non permitit in terra
sua comedi carnes porcinas. baatu in reditu nostro praceperat ei, quod
transferret se de illo loco vltra etiliam ad orientem, nolens nuncios
saracenorum transire per eum, quia videbatur sibi damnosum.

quatuor autem diebus quibus fuimus in curia sartach, nunquam prouisum fuit
nobis de cibo, nisi semel de modico cosmos. in via vero inter ipsum et
patrem suum habuimus magnum timorem. ruteni enim et hungari, et alani serui
eorum, quorum est magna multitudo inter eos, associant se viginti vel
triginta simul, et fugiant de nocte, habentes pharetras et arcus, et
quemcunque inuenuint de nocte interficiunt, de die latitantes. et quando
sunt equi eorum fatigati veniunt de nocte ad multitudinem equorum in
pascuis, et mutant equos, et vnum vel duos ducunt secum, vt comedant quum
indiguerint. occursum ergo talium timebat multum dux noster. in illa via
fuissemus mortui fame, si non portauissemus nobiscum modicum de biscocto.

[sidenote: exacta maris caspij descripto.] venimus tandem ad etiliam
maximum flumen. est enim in quadruplo maius quam sequana, et
profundissimum: veniens de maiori bulgaria, qua est ad aquilonem, tendens
in quendam lacum, siue quoddam mare, quod modo vocat illud mare sircan, a
quadam ciuitate, qua est iuxta ripam eius in perside. sed isidorus vocat
illud mare caspium. habet enim montes caspios, et persidem a meridie:
montes vero musihet, hoc est, assassinorum ad orientem, qui contiguantur
cum montibus caspijs. ad aquilonem vero habet illam solitudinem, in qua
modo sunt tartari. [sidenote: cangla populi, vel cangitta.] prius vero
erant ibi quidam qui dicebantur cangla: et ex illo latere recipit etiliam,
qui crescit in astate sicut nilus agypti. ad occidentem vero habet montes
alanorum et lesgi; et portam ferream, et montes georgianorum. habet igitur
illud mare tria latera inter montes, aquilonare vero habet ad planiciem.
[sidenote: frater andreas.] frater andreas ipse circumdedit duo latera
eius, meridionale scilicet et orientale. [sidenote: reprehenditur isidori
error de mari caspio.] ego vero alia duo; aquilonare scilicet in eundo a
baatu ad mangu cham, occidentale vero in reuertendo de baatu in syriam.
quatuor mensibus potest circundari. et non est verum quod dicit isidorus.
quod sit sinus exiens, ab oceano: nusquan enim tangit oceanum, sed vndique
circundatur terra.


the same in english.

of the russians, hungarians, and alanians: and of the caspian sea. chap.
  20.

now, as concerneth sartach, whether he beleeues in christ, or no, i knowe
not. this i am sure of, that he will not be called a christian. yea rather
he seemeth vnto mee to deride and skoffe at christians. he lieth in the way
of the christians, as namely of the russians, the valachians, the
bulgarians of bulgaria the lesser, the soldaianes, the kerkis, and the
alanians: who all of them passe by him, as they are going to the court of
his father baatu, to carie gifts: whereupon he is more in league with them.
how best, if the saracens come, and bring greater gifts than they, they are
dispatched sooner. he hath about him certaine nestorian priestes, who pray
vpon their beades, and sing their deuotions. also, there is another vnder
baatu called berta [sidenote: or, berca.], who feedeth his cattell toward
porta ferrea, or derbent, where lieth the passage of all those saracens,
which come out of persia, and out of turkie to goe vnto baatu, and passing
by they giue rewards vnto him. and he professeth himselfe to be a saracene,
and will not permit swines flesh to be eaten in his dominions. howbeit, at
the time of our return, baatu commanded him to remoue himselfe from that
place, and to inhabite vpon the east side of volga: for hee was vnwilling
that the saracens messengers should passe by the saide berrta, because he
sawe it was not for his profite. for the space of foure dayes while we
remained in the court of sartach, we had not any victuals at all allowed
vs, but once onely a little cosmos. and in our iourney betweene him and his
father, wee trauelled in great feare. for certaine russians, hungarians,
and alanians being seruants vnto the tartars (of whom they haue great
multitudes among them) assemble themselues twentie or thirtie in a
companie, and so secretly in the night conueying themselues from home they
take bowes and arrowes with them, and whomsoeuer they finde in the night
season, they put him to death, hiding themselues in the day time. and
hauing tired their horses, they goe in the night vnto a company of other
horses feeding in some pasture, and change them for newe, taking with them
also one or two horses besides, to eate them when they stand in neede. our
guide therefore was sore afraide, least we should haue met with such
companions. in this iourney wee had died for famine, had we not caried some
of our bisket with vs. at length we came vnto the mighty riuer of etilia,
or volga. for it is foure times greater then the riuer of sein, and of a
wonderfull depth: and issuing forth of bulgaria the greater, it runneth
into a certain lake or sea, which of late they call the hircan sea,
according to the name of a certain citie in persia, standmg vpon the shore
thereof. howbeit isidore calleth it the caspian sea. for it hath the
caspian mountaines and the land of persia situate on the south side
thereof: and the mountaines of musihet, that is to say, of the people
called assassini [footnote: a tribe who murdered all strangers: hence our
word _assassin_.] towards the east, which mountaines are coioyned vnto the
caspian mountaines, but on the north side thereof lieth the same desert,
wherein the tartars doe now inhabite. [sidenote: changla.] howbeit
heretofore there dwelt certaine people called changla. and on that side it
receiueth the streams of etilia: which riuer increaseth in sommer time,
like vnto the riuer nilus in agypt. vpon the west part thereof, it hath the
mountaines of alani, and lesgi, and porta ferrea, or derbent, and the
mountaines of georgia. this sea therefore is compassed in on three sides
with the mountaines, but on the north side by plaine grounde. [sidenote:
frier andrew.] frier andrew, in his iourney traueiled round about two sides
therof, namely the south and the east sides: and i my selfe about other
two, that is to say, the north side in going from baatu to mangu-can, and
in returning likewise; and the west side in comming home from baatu into
syria. a man may trauel round about it in foure moneths. and it is not true
what isidore reporteth, namely that this sea is a bay or gulfe comming
forth of the ocean: for it doeth, in no part thereof, ioyne with the ocean,
but is enuironed on all sides with lande.


de curia baatu, et qualiter recepti fuerunt ab eo. cap. 21.

[sidenote: oceanus aquilonaris isisdorus.] tota ilia regio a latere
occidentali istius maris, vbi sunt porta ferrea alexandri, et montes
alanorum, vsque ad occanum aquilonarem et paludes maotidis vbi mergitur
tanais, solebat dici albania: de qua dicit isisdorus quod habet canes ita
magnos, tantaque feritatis, vt tauros premant, leones perimant. quod verum
est, prout intellexi a narrantibus, quod ibi versus oceanum aquilonarem
faciunt canes trahere in bigis sicut boues propter magnitudinem et
fortitudinem eorum. in illo ergo loco vbi nos aplicuimus super etiliam est
casale nouum, quod fecerunt tartari de rutenis mixtim, qui transponunt
nuncios euntes, et redeuntes ad curiam baatu: quia baatu est in vlteriori
ripa versus orientem nec transit illum locum vbi nos applicuimus ascendendo
in astate, sed iam incipiebat descendere. [sidenote: descendit naui per
flumen volga. nota] de ianuario enim vsque ad augustum ascendit ipsi, et
omnes alij versus frigidas regiones, et in augusto incipiunt redire.
descendimus ergo in naui ab illo casali vsque ad curiam eius. et ab illo
vsque ad villas maioris bulgaria versus aquilonem, sunt quinque dicta. et
miror quis diabolus portauit illuc legem machometi. [sidenote: 30 dieta a
porta ferrea. astracan.] a porta enim ferrea, qua est exitus persidis, sunt
plusquam triginta dieta per transuersum, solitudinem ascendendo iuxta
etiliam vsque in illam bulgariam, vbi nulla est ciuitas, nisi quadam
casalia prope vbi cadit etilia in mare. et illi bulgari sunt pessimi
saraceni, fortius tenentes legem machometi, quam aliqui alij. [sidenote:
descriptio curia baatu.] quum ergo vidi curiam baatu, expaui, quia
videbantur prope domus eius, quasi quadam magna ciuitas protensa in longum,
et populus vndique circumfusus, vsque ad tres vel quatuor leueas. et sicut
populus israel sciebat vnusquisque ad quam regionem tabernaculi deberet
figere tentoria: ita ipsi sciunt ad quod latus curia debeant se collocare,
quando ipsi deponunt domus. [sidenote: horda sonat medium.] vnde dicitur
curia orda lingua corum, quod sonat medium, quia semper est in media
hominum suorum: hoc excepto quod recte ad meridiem nullus se collocat, quia
ad pattem illam aperiuntur porta curia: sed a dextris et a sinistris
extendunt se quantum volunt secundum exigentiam locorum: dummodo recte ante
curiam, vel ex opposito curia non descendunt. fuimus ergo ducti ad quondam
saracenum, qui non prouidebat nobis de aliquo cibo sequenti die fuimus ad
curiam, et fecerat extendi magnum tentorium, quia domus non potuisset
capere tot homines et mulieres, quot conuenerant. monuit nos ductor noster
vt non loqueremur, donec baatu praciperet: et tunc loqueremur breuiter.
[sidenote: misit rex francia ad kencham nuncios.] quasiuit etiam vtrum
misissetis nuncios ad eos. dixi qualiter miseratis ad kencham, et quod nec
ad ipsum misissetis nuncios, nec ad sartach literas, nisi credidissetis eos
fuisse christianos: quia non pro timore aliquo, sed ex congratulatione,
quia audiueratis eos esse christianos misistis. tunc duxit nos ad
papilionem: et monebamur, ne tangeremus cordas tentorij, quas ipsi reputant
loco liminis domus. stetimus ibi nudis pedibus in habitti nostro
discoopertis capitibus, et eramus spectaculum magnum in oculis eorum.
[sidenote: iohannes de plano carpini.] fuerat enim ibi frater iohannes de
plano carpini, sed ipse mutauerat habitum ne contemneretur; quia erat
nuncius domini papa. tunc inducti fuimus vsque ad medium tentorij, nec
requisiuerunt vt faceremus aliquam reuerentiam genua flectendo, sicut
solent facere nuncij. stetimus ergo coram eo quantum possit dici, miserere
mei deus: et omnes erant in summo silentio. ipse vero super solium longum
sedebat et latum sicut lectus, totum deauratum, ad quod ascendebatur tribus
gradibus, et vna domina iuxta eum. viri vero diffusi sedebant a dextris
domina et a sinistris quod non implebant mulieres ex parte vna quia erant
ibi sola vxores baatu, implebant viri. bancus vero cum cosmos et ciphis
maximis aureis et argenteis, ornatis lapidibus pratiosis erat in introitu
tentorij. respexit ergo nos diligentius, et nos eum: et videbatur mihi
similis in statura domino iohanni de bello monte cuius anima rcquiescit in
pace. erat etiam vultus eius tunc perfusus gutta rosea. tandem pracepit vt
loqueremur. tunc ductor noster pracepit vtflecteremus genua, et loqueremur.
flext vnum genu tanquam homini: tunc innuit quod ambo flecterem, quod et
feci, nolens contendere super hoc. tunc pracepit quod loquerer. et ego
cogitans quod orarem dominum, quia flexeram ambo genua, incepi verba
oratione, dicens: domine, nos oramus dominum, a quo bona cuncta procedunt,
qui dedit vobis ista terrena, vt det vobis post hac calestia: quia hac sine
illis vana sunt. et ipse diligenter auscultauit, et subiunxit: noueritis
pro certo quod coelestia non habebitis, nisi fueritis christianus. dicit
enim deus, qui crediderit et baptizatus fuerit, saluus erit: qui vero non
crediderit, condemnabitur. ad illud verbum ipse modeste subrisit, et alij
moal inceperunt plaudere manus deridendo nos. et obstupuit interpres meus,
quem oportuit me confortare ne timeret. [sidenote litera regis francorum.]
tunc facto silentio, dixi: ego veni ad filium vestrum, quia audiuimus quod
esset christianus, et attuli et literas ex parte domini regis francorum
ipse misit me huc ad vos. vos debetis scire qua de causa. tunc fecit me
surgere. et quasiuit nomem vestrum, et meum, et socij mei, et interpretis,
et fecti omnia scribi. quasiuit etiam quia intellexerat quod exieratis
terram vestram cum exercitu vt haberetis bellum. respondi, contra saracenos
violantes domum dei hierusalam. quasiuit etiam si vnquam misissetis nuncios
ad eum. ad vos dixi nuquam. tunc fecit nos vedere et dari de lacte, suo ad
bibendum, quod ipsi valde magnum reputant, quando aliquis bibit cosmos eum
eo in domo sua. et dum sedens respicerem terram, pracepit vt cleuarem
vultum volens adhuc nos amplius respicere, vel forte pro sortilegio: quia
habent pro malo omine vel signo, vel pro mala prognostica, quando aliquis
sedet coram eis inclinata facie quasi tristis, maxime quum appodiat
maxillam vel mentum super manum. tunc exiuimus, et post pauca, venit ductor
noster ad nos, et ducens nos ad hospitium, dixit mihi, dominus rex rogat,
quod retinearis in terra ista: et hoc non potest baatu facere sine
conscientia mangu cham. vnde oportet quod tu et interpres tuus eatis ad
mangu cham. socius vero tuus et alius homo reuertentur ad curiam sartach
ibi expectantes donec reuertatis. tunc incepit homo dei interpres lugere
reputans se perditum: socius etiam meus contestari, quod citius amputarent
ei caput quam quod diuideretur a me. et ego dixi, quod sine socio non
possem ire: et etiam quod bene indigebamus duobus famulis, quia si
contingeret vnum infirmari, non possem solus romanere. tunc ipse reuersus
ad curiam dixit verba baatu. tunc pracepit, vadant duo sacerdotes et
interpres: et clericus reuertatur ad sartach. ille reuersus dixit nobis
summam. et quando volebam loqui pro clerico, quod iret nobiscum, dixit, non
loquamini amplius qua baatu definiuit, et eo amplius non audeo redire ad
curiam. de eleemosyna habebat goset clericus viginti sex ipperpera et non
plus: quoram decem retinuit sibi et puero: et sexdecem dedit homini dei pro
nobis. et sic diuisi sumus cum lachrimis ab inuicem: illo redeunte ad
curiam sartach, et nobis ibi remanentibus.


the same in english.

of the court of baatu: and howe we were entertained by him. chap. 21.

at the region extending from the west shore of the foresaid sea, where
alexanders iron gate, otherwise called the gate of derbent, is situate and
from the mountaines of alania, all along by the fennes of alcotts,
whereinto the riuer of tanais falleth and so forth, to the north ocean, was
wont to be called albania. [sidenote: the north ocean.] of which countrey
isidore reporteth, that there be dogs of such an huge stature and so
fierce, that they are able in fight to match bulles and to master lions.
which is true, as i vnderstand by diuers, who tolde me, that there towardes
the north ocean they make their dogges to draw in carts like oxen, by
reason of their bignesse and strength. moreouer, vpon that part of etilia
where we arriued, there is a new cottage built, wherein they haue placed
tartars and russians both together, to ferrie ouer, and transport
messengers going and comming to and fro the court of baatu. for baatu
remaineth vpon the farther side towards the east. neither ascendeth hee in
sommer time more northward then the foresaide place where we arriued, but
was euen then descending to the south. from ianuarie vntil august both he
and all other tartars ascend by the banks of riuers towards cold and
northerly regions, and in august they begin to returne backe againe.
[sidenote: he descended downe the riuer volga in a barke.] we passed downe
the streame therefore in a barke, from the foresaid cottage vnto his court.
from the same place vnto the villages of bulgaria the greater, standing
toward the north, it is fiue dayes iourney. i wonder what deuill caried the
religion of mahomet thither. for, from derbent, which is vpon the extreame
borders of persia, it is about 30 daies iourney to passe ouerthwart the
desert, and so to ascend by the banke of etilia, into the foresaid countrey
of bulgaria. [sidenote: astrscan.] all which way there is no citie, but
onely certaine cottages neere vnto that place where etilia falleth into the
sea. those bulgarians are most wicked saracens, more earnestly professing
the damnable religion of mahomet, then any other nation whatsoeuer.
[sidenote: the description of baatu and his court.] moreouer, when i first
behelde the court of baatu, i was astonied at the sight thereof; for his
houses or tents seemed as though they had bene some huge and mighty citie,
stretching out a great way in length, the people ranging vp and downe about
it for the space of some three or four leagues. and euen as the people of
israel knew euery man, on which side of the tabernacle to pitch his tent:
euen so euery one of them knoweth right well, towards what side of the
court he ought to place his house when he takes it from off the cart.
[sidenote: horda signifieth the midst.] wherupon the court is called in
their language horda, which signifieth, the midst: because the gouernour or
chieftaine among them dwels alwaies in the middest of his people: except
onely that directly towards the south no subiect or inferiour person
placeth himselfe, because towards that region the court gates are set open:
but vnto the right hand, and the left hand they extend themselues as farre
as they will, according to the conueniencie of places, so that they place
not their houses directly opposite against the court. at our arriual we
were conducted vnto a saracen, who prouided not for vs any victuals at all.
the day following, we were brought vnto the court and baatu had caused a
large tent to be erected, because his house or ordinarie tent could not
contain so many men and women as were assembled. our guide admonished vs
not to speake, till baatu had giuen vs commandement so to doe, and that
then we should speake our mindes briefly. then baatu demanded whether your
maiestie had sent ambassadours vnto him or no? i answered, that your
maiestie had sent messengers to ken can: and that you would not haue sent
messengers vnto him, or letters vnto sartach, had not your highnes bene
perswaded that they were become christians: because you sent not vnto them
for any feare, but onely for congratulation, and curtesies sake, in regard
that you heard they were conuerted to christianitie. then led he vs vnto
his pauilion and wee were charged not to touch the cordes of the tent,
which they account in stead of the threshold of the house. there we stoode
in our habite bare footed, and bare-headed, and were a great and strange
spectacle in their eyes. [sidenote: iohn de plano carpini.] for indeed
frier iohn de plano carpini had byn there before my comming: howbeit,
because he was the pope's messenger, he changed his habit that he might not
be contemned. then we were brought into the very midst of the tent, neither
required they of vs to do any reuerence by bowing our knees, as they vse to
doe of other messengers. wee stood therefore before him for the space
wherein a man might haue rehearsed the psalme, miserere mei deus: and there
was great silence kept of all men. baatu himselfe sate vpon a seate long
and broad like vnto a bed, guilt all ouer, with three stairs to ascend
thereunto, and one of his ladies sate beside him. the men there assembled,
sate downe scattering, some on the right hand of the saide lady, and some
on the left. those places on the one side which the women filled not vp
(for there were only the wiues of baatu) were supplied by the men. also, at
the very entrance of the tent stoode a bench furnished with cosmos, and
with stately great cuppes of siluer, and golde, beeing richly set with
precious stones. baatu beheld vs earnestly, and we him and he seemed to me
to resemble in personage, monsieur iohn de beau mont, whose soule resteth
in peace. and hee had a fresh ruddie colour in his countenance. at length
he commanded vs to speake. then our guide gaue vs direction, that wee
should bow our knees and speak. wherupon i bowed one knee as vnto a man:
then he signified that i should kneele vpon both knees: and i did so, being
loath to contend about such circumstaunces. and again he commanded me to
speak. then i thinking of praier vnto god, because i kneeled on both my
knees, began to pray on this wise: sir, we beseech the lord, from whom all
good things doe proceed and who hath giuen you these earthly benefites,
that it would please him hereafter to make you partaker of his heauenly
blessings: because the former without these are but vain and vnprofitable.
and i added further. be it knowen vnto you of a certainty, that you shal
not obtain the ioyes of heauen, vnles you becomes a christian: for god
saith, whosoeuer beleeueth and is baptized, shalbe saued: but he that
beleeueth not, shalbe condemned. at this word he modestly smiled: but the
other moals began to clap their hands, and to deride vs. and my silly
interpreter, of whom especially i should haue receiued comfort in time of
need, was himself abashed and vtterly dasht out of countenance. [sidenote:
the letters of the french king.] then, after silence made, i said vnto him,
i came vnto your soune, because we heard that he was become a christian:
and i brought vnto him letters on the behalfe of my souereigne lord the
king of france: and your sonne sent me hither vnto you. the cause of my
comming therefore is best known vnto your selfe. then he caused me to rise
vp. and he enquired your maiesties name, and my name, and the name of mine
associate and interpreter, and caused them all to be put down in writing.
he demaunded likewise (because he had bene informed, that you were departed
out of your owne countreys with an armie) against whom you waged warre? i
answered: against the saracens, who had defiled the house of god at
ierusalem. he asked also, whether your highnes had euer before that time
sent any messengers vnto him, or no? to you sir? (said i) neuer. then
caused he vs to sit downe, and gaue vs of his milke to drinke, which they
account to be a great fauour, especially when any man is admitted to drinke
cosmos with him in his own house. and as i sate looking downe vpon the
ground, he commanded me to lift vp my countenance, being desirous as yet to
take more diligent view of vs, or els perhaps for a kinde of superstitious
obseruation. for they esteeme it a signe of ill lucke, or a prognostication
of euill vnto them, when any man sits in their presence, holding downe his
head, as if he were sad: especially when he leanes his cheeke or chinne
ypon his hand. then we departed forth, and immediately after came our guide
vnto vs, and conducting vs vnto our lodging, saide vnto me: your master the
king requesteth that you may remaine in this land, which request baatu
cannot satisfie without the knowledge and consent of mangu-can. wherefore
you, and your interpreter must of necessitie goe vnto mangu-can. howbeit
your associate, and the other man shall returne vnto the court of sartach,
staying there for you, till you come backe. then began the man of god mine
interpreter to lament, esteeming himselfe but a dead man. mine associate
also protested, that they should sooner chop off his head, then withdrawe
him out of my companie. moreouer i my selfe saide, that without mine
associate i could not goe: and that we stood in neede of two seruants at
the least, to attend vpon vs, because, if one should chance to fall sicke,
we could not be without another. then returning vnto the court, he told
these sayings vnto baatu. and baatu commanded saying: let the two priests
and the interpreter goe together, but let the clearke return vnto sartach.
and comming againe vnto vs, hee tolde vs euen so. and when i would haue
spoken for the clearke to haue had him with vs, he saide: no more words:
for baatu hath resolued, that so it shall be; and therefore i dare not goe
vnto the court any more. goset the clearke had remaining of the almes money
bestowed vpon him, 26. yperperas, and no more; 10. whereof he kept for
himselfe and for the lad, and 16. he gaue vnto the man of god for vs. and
thus were we parted asunder with teares: he returning vnto the court of
sartach, and our selues remaining still in the same place.


de itinere fraturn versus curiam mangu cham. cap. 22.

in vigilia assumptionis peruenit ipse clericus ad curiam sartach: et in
crastino fuerunt sacerdotes nestormi induti vestimentis nostris coram
sartach. tunc ducti fuimus ad alium hospitem, qui debebat nobis prouidere
de domo et cibo et equis. sed quia non habuimus, quod daremus ei, omnia
male faciebat. [sidenote: quintano septimanas iuxta etiliam descendebant.]
et bigauimus cum baatu descendendo iuxta etiliam quinque septimanas.
aliquando habuit socius meus tantam famem, quod dicebat mihi quasi
lachrymando: videbatur mihi quod nunquam comederim. forum sequitur semper
curiam baatu. sed illud erat tam longe a nobis, quod non poteramus ire.
oportebat enim nos ire pedibus pro defectu equorum. [sidenote: quidam
hungari.] tandem inuenerunt nos quidam hungari, qui fuerant clericuli,
quorum vnus sciebat adhuc cantare multa corde, et habebatur ab alijs
hungaris quasi sacerdos, et vocabatur ad exequias suorum defunctorum: et
alius fuerat competenter instructus in grammatica: qui intelligebat
quicquid dicebamus ei literaliter, sed nesciebat respondere: qui fecerunt
nobis magnam consolationem, afferentes cosmos ad bibendum, et carnes
aliquando ad comedendum: qui quum postulassent a nobis aliquos libros, et
non haberem quos possem dare, nullos enim habebam, nisi biblium et
breuiarium, dolui multum. tunc dixi eis, afferte nobis chartas, et ego
scribam vobis, quandiu erimus hic: quod et fecerunt. et scripsi vtrasque
horas beata virginis et officium defunctorum. [sidenote: comanus] quodam
die iunxit se nobis quidam comanus, salutans nos verbis latinis, dicens,
saluete domini. ego mirens, ipso resalutato, quasiui ab eo, quis eum
docuerat illam salutationem. et ipse dixit quod in hungaria fuit baptizatus
a fratribus nostris qui docuerant illam salutationem. et ipsi dixit quod in
hungaria fuit baptizatus a fratribus nostris qui docuerant illum eam. dixit
etiam quod baatu quasiuerat ab eo multa de nobis, et quod ipse dixerat ei
conditiones ordinis nostri. ego vidi baatu equitantem cum turba sua, et
omnes patres familias equitantes cum eo, secundum astimationem meam non
erant quingenti viri. [sidenote: iter quatuor mensium a volga. ingens
frigus.] tandem circa finem exaltationis sancta crucis venit ad nos quidam
diues moal, cuius pater erat millenarius, quod magnum est inter eos,
dicens, ego vos debeo ducere ad mangu cham, et est iter quatuor mensium: et
tantum frigus est ibi, quod finduntur ibi lapides et arbores pro frigore:
videatis vtrum poteritis sustinere. cui respondi: spero in virtute dei,
quod nos sustinebimus, quod alij homines possunt sustinere. tunc dixit: si
non poteritis sustinere, ego relinquam vos in via. cui respondi, hoc non
esset iustum: quia non iuimus pro nobis, nisi missi a domino vestro: vnde
ex quo vobis committimur, non debetis nos dimittere. tunc dixit, bene erit.
post hoc fecit nos ostendere sibi omnes vestes nostras, et quod sibi
videbatur minus necessarium fecit deponere sub custodia hospitis nostri.
[sidenote: 16. septemb.] in crastino attulerunt cuilibet nostrum vnam
pelliceam villosam arietinam et braccas de eadem, et botas siue bucellos
secundum morem eorum cum soccis de filtro; et almucias de pellibus secundum
modum eorum. [sidenote: cangle populi maior bulgaria.] et secunda die post
exaltationem sancta crucis incepimus equitare nos tres habentes signarios
et equitauimus continue versus orientem vsque ad festum omnium sanctorum,
per totam illam terram, et adhuc amplius habitabant cangle, quedam
parentela romanorum. ad aquilonem habebamus maiorem bulgariam, et ad
meridiem pradictum mare caspium.


the same in english.

of our iourney towards the court of mangu can. chap. 22.

vpon assumption euen our clearke arriued at the court of sartach. and on
the morrow after, the nestorian priestes were adorned with our vestments in
the presence of the said sartach. then wee our selues were conducted vnto
another hoste, who was appointed to prouide vs houseroome, victualles, and
horses. but because wee had not ought to bestowe vpon him, hee did all
things vntowardly for vs. [sidenote: they trauell fiue weekes by the banke
of etilia.] then wee rode on forwards with baatu, descending along by the
banks of etilia, for the space of fiue weekes together: sometimes mine
associate was so extremelie hungrie, that hee would tell mee in a manner
weeping, that it fared with him as though hee had neuer eaten any thing in
all his life before. there is a faire or market following the court of
baatu at all times: but it was so farre distant from vs that we could not
haue recourse thereunto. for wee were constrained to walke on foote for
want of horses. [sidenote: hungarians.] at length certaine hungarians (who
had sometime bene after a sort cleargie men) found vs out and one of them
could as yet sing many songs without booke, and was accompted of other
hungarians as a priest, and was sent for vnto the funerals of his deceased
countrey men. there was another of them also pretily wel instructed in his
grammer: for hee could vnderstand the meaning of any thing that wee spake
but could not answere vs. these hungarians were a great comfort vnto vs,
bringing vs cosmos to drinke, yea and some times flesh for to eate also
who, when they requested to haue some bookes of vs, and i had not any to
giue them (for indede we had none but onely a bible, and a breuiarie) it
grieued mee exceedingly. and i said vnto them: bring mee some inke and
paper, and i will write for you so long as we shall remaine here: and they
did so. and i copied out for them horas beata virginis, and officium
defunctorum. [sidenote: a comanian.] moreouer, vpon a certaine day, there
was a comanian that accompanied vs, saluting vs in latine, and saying:
saluete domini. wondering thereat and saluting him againe, i demaunded of
him, who had taught him that kind of salutation? hee saide that hee was
baptised in hungaria by our friers, and that of them hee learned it. he
said moreouer, that baatu had enquired many things of him concerning vs,
and that hee told him the estate of our order. afterwarde i sawe baatu
riding with his companie, and all his subiects that were householders or
masters of families riding with him, and (in mine estimation) they were not
fiue hundred persons in all. at length about the ende of holy roode, there
came a certaine great moal vnto vs (whose father was a millenarie, which is
a great office among them) saying: [sidenote: a iourney of 4. moneths from
volga.] i am the man that must conduct you vnto mangu-can, and we haue
thither a iourney of foure moneths long to trauell, and there such extreame
colde in those parts, that stones and trees do euen riue asunder in regarde
thereof. therefore i would wish you throughly to aduise your selues,
whether you be able to indure it or no. vnto whom i answered: i hope by
gods help that we shalbe able to brooke that which other men can indure.
then he saide: if you cannot indure it, i will foresake you by the way. and
i answered him: it were not iust dealing for you so to doe: for wee goe not
thither vpon anie busmesse of our owne, but by reason that we are sent by
your lord. wherefore sithence we are committed vnto your charge, you ought
in no wise to forsake vs. then he said: all shalbe well. afterward he
caused vs to shewe him all our garments: and whatsoeuer hee deemed to be
lesse needfull for vs, he willed vs to leaue it behind in the custodie of
our hoste. on the morrow they brought vnto each of vs a furred gowne, made
all of rammes skinnes, with the wool stil vpon them, and breeches of the
same, and boots also of buskins, according to their fashion, and shooes
made of felt, and hoods also made of skins after their maner. [sidenote:
the 16. of september. 46. dayes.] the second day after holy rood, we began
to set forward vpon our iourney, hauing three guides to direct vs: and we
rode continually eastward, till the feast of all saints. throughout all
that region, and beyonde also did the people of changle [marginal note: or,
kangitta.] inhabite, who were by parentage descended from the romanes. vpon
the north side of vs, wee had bulgaria the greater, and on the south, the
foresaid caspian sea.


de flumine iagag, et de diuersis regionibus siue nationibus. cap. 21.

[sidenote: iagag flumen 12. dietis a volga pascatir terra, vel bascardorum
terra vel zibiet] postquam iueramus duodecim diebus ab etilia inuenimus
magnum flumen, quod vocant iagag: et venit ab aquilone de terra pascatir
descendens in pradictum mare. idioma pascatir et hungarorum idem est: et
sunt pastores sine ciuitate aliqua. et contiguatur maiori bulgaria ab
occidente. ab illa terra versus orientem in latere illo aquilonari non est
amplius aliqua ciuitas. vnde bulgaria maior est vltima regio habens
ciuitatem. [sidenote: hungaria pascitir oriundi.] de illa regione pascatir
exierunt huni, qui postea dicti sunt hungari. vnde ipsa est maior bulgaria.
et dicit isidorus, quod pernicibus equis claustra alexandri rupibus caucusi
feras gentes cohibentia transierunt: ita quod vsque in agyptum soluebatur
eis tributum. destruxerunt etiam omnes terras vsque in franciam. vnde
fuerunt maioris potentia, quam sunt adhuc tartari. cum illis occurrerunt
blaci et bulgari et vandali. de illa enim maiori bulgaria venerunt illi
bulgari: et qui sunt vltra danubum prope constantinopolin, et iuxta
pascatir sunt ilac, quod idem est quod blac: [sidenote: nota.] sed b.
nesciunt tartari sonare: a quibus venerunt illl qui sunt in terra assani.
vtrosque enim vocant ilac, et hos et illos lingua rutenorum et polonorum et
boemorum. sclauorum est idem idioma cum lingua vandalorum, quorum omnium
manus fuit cum hunis: et nunc pro maiori parte est cum tartaris quos deus
suscitant a remotioribus partibus, populum multum, et gentem stultam
secundum quod dicit dominus, prouocabo eos, id est, non custodientes legem
suam, in eo qui non est populus, et in gente stulta irritabo eos.
[sidenote: deut 32. 21.] hoc completur ad literam super omnes nationes non
custodientes legem dei. hoc quod dixi de terra pascatir scio per fratres
pradicatores, [marginal note: qui fuerunt isti fratres?] qui iuerunt illuc
ante aduentum tartarorum. et ex tunc erant ipsi subiugati a vicinas
bulgaris saracenis, et plures eorum facti saracenii. alia possunt sciri per
chronica: quia constat quod illa prouincia post constantinopolum, qua modo
dicuntur bulgaria, valachia, sclauonia, fuerunt prouincia gracorum.
hungaria fuit pannonia. [sidenote: cangle planicies ingens.] equitatuimus
ergo per terram cangle a festo sancta crucis vsque ad festum omnium
sanctorum, quolibet die fere quantum est a parisijs vsque aurelianum,
secundum quod possum estimare, et plus aliquando: secundum quod habebamus
copiam equorum. aliquando enim mutabamus bis in die vel ter equos.
aliquando ibamus duobus diebus vel tribus, quibus non inueniebamus populum,
et oportebat leuius ire. de viginti vel triginta equis nos semper hauebamus
peiores, quia extranei eramus. omnes enim accipiebant ante nos equos
meliores. mihi semper prouidebant de forti equo, quia eram ponderosus
valde: sed vtrum suauiter ambularet vel non, de hoc non auderem facere
quastionem. nec etiam audebam conqueri, si dure portaret. sed fortunam suam
oportebat vnumquemque sustinere. vnde oriebatur nobis difficilimus labor:
quia multoties fatigabantur equi, antequam possemus peruenire ad populum.
et tunc oportebat nos percutere et flagellare equos, ponere etiam vestes
super alios saginarios, mutare equos saginarios; aliquando nos duos ire in
vno equo.


the same in english.

of the the riuer of iagac [marginal note: or, iaic.]: and of diuers regions
  or nations. chap. 23.

[sidenote: iaic twelue dayes iourney from volga. pascatir.] hauing
traueiled twelue dayes iourney from etilia, wee fonnd a mightie riuer
called iagac: which riuer issuing out of the north, from the land of
pascatir, descendeth into the foresaid sea. the language of pascatir, and
of the hungarians is all one, and they are all of them shepheards, not
hauing any cities. and their countrey bordereth vpon bulgaria the greater,
on the west frontier thereof. from the northeast part of the said countrey,
there is no citie at all. for bulgaria the greater is the farthest countrey
that way, that hath any citie therein. [sidenote: the hungarians descended
from the bascirdes.] out of the forenamed region of pascatir, proceeded the
hunnes of olde time, who afterwarde were called hungarians. next vnto it is
bulgaria the greater. isidore reporteth concerning the people of this
nation, that with swift horses they trauersed the impregnable walles and
bounds of alexander, (which, together with the rocks of caucasus, serued to
restraine those barbarous and blood-thirstie people from inuading the
regions of the south) insomuch that they had tribute paid vnto them, as
farre as agypt. likewise they wasted all countreis euen vnto france.
whereupon they were more mightie than the tartars as yet are. [sidenote:
valachians.] and vnto them the blacians, the bulgarians, and the vandals
ioyned themselues. for out of bulgaria the greater, came those bulgarians.
moreouer, they which inhabit beyond danubius, neere vnto constantinople,
and not farre from pascatir, are called ilac, which (sauing the
pronunciation) is al one with blac, (for the tartars cannot pronounce the
letter b) from whom also descended the people which inhabit the land of
assani. for they are both of them called ilac (both these, and the other)
in the languages of the russians, the polonians, and the bohemians. the
sclauonians speake all one language with the vandals, all which banded
themselues with the hunnes: and now for the most part, they vnite
themselues vnto the tartars: whom god hath raised vp from the vtmost panes
of the earth, according to that which the lord saith: [sidenote: deut. 32.
v. 21. rom. 10. v. 19.] i will prouoke them to enuy (namely such as keepe
not his law) by a people, which is no people, and by a foolish nation will
i anger them. this prophecie is fulfilled, according to the literal sense
thereof, vpon all nations which obserue not the law of god. all this which
i haue written concerning the land of pascatir, was told me by certaine
friers pradicants, which trauailed thither before euer the tartars came
abroad. and from that time they were subdued vnto their neighbors the
bulgarians being saracens, whereupon many of them proued saracens also.
other matters concerning this people, may be known out of chronicles. for
it is manifest, that those prouinces beyond constantinople, which are now
called bulgaria, valachia, and sclauonia, were of old time prouinces
belonging to the greekes. also hungaria was heretofore called pannonia.
[sidenote: cangle an huge plaine countrey.] and wee were riding ouer the
land of cangle, from the feast of holy roode, vntill the feast of all
saints: traueiling almost euery day (according to mine estimation) as
farre, as from paris to orleans, and sometimes farther, as we were prouided
of poste horses: for some dayes we had change of horses twise or thrise in
a day. sometimes we trauailed two or three daies together, not finding any
people, and then we were constrained not to ride so fast of 20. or 30.
horses we had alwayes the woorst, because wee were strangers. for euery one
tooke their choice of the best horses before vs. they prouided mee alwaies
of a strong horse, because i was very corpulent and heauy: but whether he
ambled a gentle pase or no, i durst not make any question. neither yet
durst i complaine, although he trotted full sore. but euery man must be
contented with his lot as it fell. whereupon wee were exceedingly troubled:
for oftentimes our horses were tired before we could come at any people.
and then wee were constrained to beate and whip on our horses, and to lay
our garments vpon other emptie horses: yea and sometimes two of vs to ride
vpon one horse.


de fame et siti, et alijs miserijs quas sustinuerant in itinere. cap. 24.

de fame et siti, frigore et fatigatione non est numerus. non enim dant
cibum nisi in sero. in mane dant aliquid bibere, vel sorbere milium. in
sero dabant nobis carnes, scapulam arietis cum costis et de brodio ad
mensuram bibere. quando habebamus de brodio carnium ad satietatem optime
reficiebamur. et videbatur mihi suauissimus potus et maxime nutriens. feria
sexta permanebam ieiunus vsque ad noctem, nihil auriens. tunc oportebat me
in tristitia et dolore comedere carnes. [sidenote: defectus materia ignis.]
aliquando oportebat nos comedere carnes semicoctas vel fere crudas propter
defectum materia ignis quando iacebamus in campis et de nocte
descendebamus: quia tunc non poteramus bene colligere stercora equorum vel
boum: aliam materiam ignis raro inueniebamus; nisi forte alicubi aliquas
spinas. in ripis etiam aliquorum fluminum sunt alicubi sylua. sed hoc raro.
[sidenote: aliqua flumina.] in principio despiciebat nos multum ductor
noster, et fastidiebat eum ducere tam viles homines. postea tamen quando
incepit nos melius cognoscere, ducebat nos per curias diuitum moallorum: et
oportebat nos orare pro ipsis. vnde si habuissem bonum interpretem, habebam
oportunitatem seminandi multa bona. [sidenote: vasta solitudo.] ille
chirigis primus cham habuit quatuor filios, de quibus egressi sunt multi,
qui omnes habent modo magnas curias: et quotidie multiplicantur et
diffunduntur per illam vastam solitudinem, qua est sicut mare. per multos
ergo illorum ducebat nos ductor noster. et mirabantur supra modum, quia
nolebamus recipere aurum, vel argentum, vel vestes praciosas. quarebant
etiam de magno papa, si esset ita senex sicut audierant: audierant enim
quod esset quingentorum annorum. quarebant de terris nostris si ibi essent
multa oues, et boues, et equi. de oceano mari non potuerunt intelligere,
quod esset sine termnino vel sine ripa. in vigilia omnium sanctorum
dimisimus viam in orientem, [marginal note: nota diligenter. iter versus
mieridiem octo dierum.] quia iam populus descenderat multum versus
meridiem: et direximus iter per quasdam alpes recte in meridiem continue
per octo dies. in illa solitudine vidi multos asinos, quos vocant colan,
qui magis assimilantur mulis: quos multum prosequuti [footnote: sic.] sunt
dux noster et socij eius, sed nihil profecerunt propter nimiam velocitatem
eorum. septima die inceperunt nobis apparere ad meridiem montes altissimi:
et intrauimus planiciem, qua irrigabatur sicut hortus, et inuenimus terras
cultas. [sidenote: asuni velocissimi. montes altissimi. terra culta.
kenchat villa saracenorum.] in octauis omnium sanctorum intrauimus villam
quandam saracenorum nomine kenchat: cuius capitaneus occurrebat extra
villam duci nostro cum ceruisia et ciphis. hic est enim mos eorum; quod de
omnibus villis subditis eis, occurratur nuncijs baatu, et mangu cham cum
cibo et potu. tunc temporis ibant ibi super glaciem. [sidenote: septimo die
nouembris ibant super glaciem.] et prius a festo sancti michaelis
habueramus gelu in solitudine. quasiui de nomine prouincia illius: sed quia
iam eramus in alio territorio nescierunt mihi dicere, nisi a nomine
ciuitatis, qua erat valde parua. [sidenote: ciuitas valde parua. magnus
fluuius. multa paludes. vites.] et descendebat magnus fluuius de montibus
qui irrigabat totam regionem, secundum quod volebant aquam ducere: nec
descendebat in aliquod mare, sed absorbebatur a terra: et faciebat etiam
multas paludes. ibi vidi vites, et bibi bis de vino.


the same in english.

of the hunger, and thirst, and other miseries, which wee sustained in our
  iourney. chap. 24.

of hunger and thirst, colde and wearinesse, there was no end. for they gaue
vs no victuals, but onely in the euening. in the morning they vsed to giue
vs a little drinke, or some sodden millet to sup off. in the euening they
bestowed flesh vpon vs, as namely, a shoulder and breast of rams mutton,
and euery man a measured quantitie of broath to drinke. when we had
sufficient of the flesh-broath, we were maruellously wel refreshed. and it
seemed to me most pleasant, and most nourishing drinke. euery saterday
[footnote: friday (?).], i remained fasting vntil night, without eating or
drinking of ought. and when night came, i was constrained, to my great
grief and sorow, to eat flesh. sometimes we were faine to eate flesh halfe
sodden, or almost rawe, and all for want of fewel to seethe it withal:
especially when we lay in the fields, or were benighted before we came at
our iourneis end: because we could not then conueniently gather together
the doung of horses or oxen: for other fewel we found but seldome, except
perhaps a few thornes in some places. [sidenote: certaine riuers.] likewise
vpon the bankes of some riuers, there are woods growing here and there.
howbeit they are very rare. in the beginning our guide highly disdained vs,
and it was tedious vnto him to conduct such base fellowes. afterward, when
he began to know vs somewhat better, he directed vs on our way by the
courts of rich moals, and we were requested to pray for them. wherefore,
had i caried a good interpreter with me, i should haue had opportunities to
haue done much good. the foresaid chingis, who was the first great can or
emperour of the tartars, had foure sonnes, of whome proceeded by natural
descent many children, euery one of which doeth at this day enioy great
possessions: and they are daily multiplied and dispersed ouer that huge and
waste desert, which is, in dimensions, like vnto the ocean sea. our guide
therefore directed vs, as we were going on our iourney, vnto many of their
habitations. and they marueiled exceedingly, that we would receiue neither
gold, nor siluer, nor precious and costly garments at their hands. they
inquired also, concerning the great pope, whether he was of so lasting an
age as they had heard? for there had gone a report among them, that he was
500 yeeres olde. they inquired likewise of our countreis, whether there
were abundance of sheep, oxen, and horses or no? concerning the ocean sea,
they could not conceiue of it, because it was without limits or banks. vpon
the euen of the feast of all saints, we forsook the way leading towards the
east, (because the people were now descended very much south) and we went
on our iourney by certaine alpes, or mountaines directly southward, for the
space of 8. dayes together. [sidenote: eight dayes iourney southward. asses
swift of foote.] in the foresaid desert i saw many asses (which they cal
colan) being rather like vnto mules: these did our guide and his companions
chase very eagerly: howbeit, they did but lose their labour: for the
beastes were too swift for them. [sidenote: high mountaines. manured
grounds.] vpon the 7. day there appeared to the south of vs huge high
mountaines, and we entred into a place which was well watered, and fresh as
a garden, and found land tilled and manured. [sidenote: kenchat a village
of the saracens.] the eight day after the feast of all saints, we arriued
at a certain towne of the saracens, named kenchat, the gouernour whereof
met our guide at the townes end with ale and cups. for it is their maner at
all townes and villages, subiect vnto them, to meet the messengers of baatu
and mangu can with meate and drinke. at the same time of the yere, they
went vpon the yce in that countrey. and before the feast of s. michael
[sidenote: the 7. day of nouember.], we had frost in the desert. i enquired
the name of that prouince but being now in a strange territorie, they could
not tell mee the name thereof, but onely the name of a very smal citie in
the same prouince. [sidenote: a great riuer.] and there descended a great
riuer [footnote: the terek is probably alluded to.] downe from the
mountaines, which watered the whole region, according as the inhabitants
would giue it passage, by making diuers chanels and sluces: neither did
this riuer exonerate it selfe into any sea, but was swallowed vp by an
hideous gulfe into the bowels of the earth: [sidenote: many lakes. vines.]
and it caused many fennes or lakes. also i saw many vines, and dranke of
the wine thereof.


de interfectione ban et habitatione teutonicorum. cap. 25.

[sidenote: casale montes caucasi contiguantur mari orientali talas, vel
chincitalas ciuitas. frater andreas.] sequenti die venimus ad aliud casale
propinquius montibus. et quasiui de montibus, de quibus intellexi, quod
essent montes caucasi: qui contiguantur ex vtraque parte maris ab occidente
vsque ad orientem: et quod transiueramus mare supradictum, quod intrat
etilia. quasiui etiam de talas ciuitate, in qua erant teutonici serui buri,
de quibus dixerat frater andreas, de quibus etiam quasiueram multum in
curia sartach et baatu. sed nihil poteram intelligere, nisi quod ban
dominus eorum fuerat interfectus tali occasione. ipse non erat in bonis
pascuis. et quadam die dum esset ebrius, loquebatur ita cum hominibus suis.
nonne sum de genere chingis can sicut baatus (et ipse erat nepos baatu vel
frater) quare non vadam super ripam etilia, sicut baatu, vt pascam ibi? qua
verba relata fuerunt baatu. tunc ispse baatu scripsit hominibus illius, vt
adducerent ei dominum ipsorum vinctum quod et fecerunt. [sidenote: casale.]
tunc baatu quasiuit ab eo si dixisset tale verbum: et ipse confessus est,
tamen excusauit se, quia ebrius erat: (quia solent condonare ebrijs:) et
baatu respondit: quomodo audebas me nominare in ebrietate tua? et fecit ei
amputari caput. de illis teutonicis nihil potui cognoscere vsque ad curiam
mangu. sed in supradicto casali intellexi, quod talas erat post nos iuxta
montes per sex dietas. [sidenote: bolac villa. aurifodina.] quando veni ad
curiam mangu cham, intellexi quod ipse mangu transtulerat eos de licentia
baatu versus orientem spacio itineris vnius mensis a talas ad quandam
villam qua dicitur bolac: vbi fodiunt auram, et fabricant arma, vnde non
potui ire nec redire per eos. transiui eundo satis prope, per tres dietas
forte ciuitatem illam: sed ego ignoraui: nec potuissem etiam declinasse
extra viam, si bene sciuissem. [sidenote: intrat ditionem mangu cham.] a
pradictos casali iuimus ad orientem iuxta montes pradictos: et tunc
intrauimus inter homines mangu cham, qui vbique cantabant et plaudebant
coram ductore nostro: quia ipse erat nuncius baatu. hunc enim honorem
exhibent sibi mutuo, vt homines mangu cham recipiant nuncios baatu pradicto
modo: et similiter homines baatu nuncios mangu. tamen homines baatu
superiores sunt, nec exequuntur ita diligenter. [sidenote: alpes in quibus
habitabant caracatay. magnus fluuius.] paucis diebus post hoc intrauimus
alpes, in quibus solebant habitare caracatay: et inuenimus ibi magnum
fluuium, [footnote: the river roup.] quem oportuit nos transire nauigio.
post hac intrauimus quandam vallem, vbi vidi castrum quoddam destructum,
cuius muri non erant nisi de luto, et terra colebatur ibi. [sidenote: terra
culta. equius villa boua, longissime a perside.] et post inuenimus quandam
bonam villam qua dicitur equius, in qua erant saraceni loquentes persicum:
longissime tamen erant a perside. [sidenote: lacus quindecem dietarum
circuitu.] sequenti die transgressis illis alpibus qua descendebant a
magnis montibus ad meridiem, ingressi sumus pulcherrimam planiciem habentem
montes altos a dextris, et quoddam mare a sinistris, siue quendam lacum qui
durat quindecem dietas in circuitu. et illa planicies, tota irrigabatur ad
libitum aquis descendentibus de montibus, qua omnes recipiuntur in illud
mare. in astate rediuimus ad latus aquilonare illius maris, vbi similiter
erant magni montes. in planicie pradicta solebant esse multa villa: sed pro
maiori parte omnes erant destructa, vt pascerent ibi tartari: quia optima
pascua erant ibi. [sidenote: cailac magna villa et plena mercatoribus.]
vnam magnam villam inuenimus ibi nomini cailac, in qua erat forum, et
frequentabant eam multi mercatores. in illa quieuimus quindecem diebus,
expectantes quendam scriptorem baatu, qui debebat esse socius ducis nostri
in negotijs expediendis in curia mangu. [sidenote: contomanni.] terra illa
solebat dici organum: et solebant habere proprium idioma, et propriam
literam: sed hac tota erat occupata a contomannis. etiam in literatura illa
et idiomate solebant facere nestorini de partibus illis. dicuntur organa,
quia solebant esse optimi organista vel citharista, vt dicebatur mihi. ibi
primo vidi idolatrias, de quibus noueritis, quod sunt multa secta in
oriente.


the same in english.

how ban was put to death: and concerning the habitation of the dutch men.
  chap. 25.

[sidenote: a cottage. the mountains of caucasus are extended vnto the
easterne sea.] the day following, we came vnto another cottage neere vnto
the mountains. and i enquired what mountains they were, which i vnderstood
to be the mountains of caucasus, which are stretched forth, and continued
on both parts to the sea, from the west vnto the east: and on the east part
they are conioyned vnto the foresaid caspian sea, whereinto the riuer of
volga dischargeth his streams. i enquired also of the city of [sidenote:
the citie of talas or chincitalas. friar andrew.] talas, wherein were
certaine dutchmen seruants vnto one buri, of whom frier andrew made
mention. concerning whom also i enquired very diligently in the courts of
sartach and baatu. howbeit i could haue no intelligence of them, but onely
that their lord and master ban was put to death vpon the occasion
following: this ban was not placed in good and fertile pastures. and vpon a
certain day being drunken, he spake on this wise vnto his men. am not i of
the stocke and kinred of chingis can, as well as baatu? (for in very deede
he was brother or nephew vnto baatu). why then doe i not passe and repasse
vpon the banke of etilia, to feed my cattel there, as freely as baatu
himselfe doeth? which speeches of his were reported vnto baatu. whereupon
baatu wrote vnto his seruants to bring their lorde bound vnto him. and they
did so. then baatu demanded of him whether he had spoken any such words?
and hee confessed that he had. howbeit, (because it is the tartars maner to
pardon drunken men) he excused himselfe that he was drunken at the same
time. howe durst thou (quoth baatu) once name mee in thy drunkennesse? and
with that hee caused his head to be chopt off. concerning the foresaid
dutchmen, i could not vnderstand ought, till i was come vnto the court of
mangu-can. [sidenote: the village of bolac.] and there i was informed that
mangu-can had remoued them out of the iurisdiction of baatu, for the space
of a moneths iourney from talas eastward, vnto a certaine village, called
bolac: where they are set to dig gold, and to make armour. whereupon i
could neither goe nor come by them. i passed very neere the saide citie in
going forth, as namely, within three dayes iourney thereof: but i was
ignorant that i did so: neither could i haue turned out of my way, albeit i
had knowen so much. from the foresaide cottage we went directly eastward,
by the mountaines aforesaid. [sidenote: he entreth into the territories of
mangu can.] and from that time we trauailed among the people of mangu-can,
who in all places sang and daunced before our guide, because hee was the
messenger of baatu. for this curtesie they doe affoord eche to other:
namely the people of mangu-can receiuing the messengers of baatu, in maner
aforesaide: and so likewise the people of baatu intertaining the messengers
of mangu-can. notwithstanding the people of baatu are more surlie and
stoute, and shewe not so much curtesie vnto the subiectes of mangu-can, as
they doe vnto them. [sidenote: certain alpes wherein the cara catayans
inhabited. a mighty riuer.] a fewe dayes after, wee entered vpon those
alpes where the cara catayans were woont to inhabite. and there wee found a
mightie riuer: insomuch that we were constrained to embarke our selues, and
to saile ouer it. afterward we came into a certaine valley, where i saw a
castle destroyed, the walles whereof were onely of mudde: and in that place
the ground was tilled also. [sidenote: ground tilled. equius.] and there
wee founde a certaine village, named equius, wherein were saracens,
speaking the persian language: howbeit they dwelt an huge distance from
persia. [sidenote: a lake of fifteene dayes iourney in compasse.] the day
following, hauing passed ouer the foresaide alpes which descended from the
great mountains southward, we entered into a most beautiful plaine, hauing
high mountaines on our right hande, and on the left hande of vs a certaine
sea or lake, [footnote: lake erivan.] which containeth fifteene dayes
iourney in circuite. all the foresayde plaine is most commodiously watered
with certaine freshets distilling from the said mountaines, all which do
fall into the lake. in sommer time wee returned by the north shore of the
saide lake, and there were great mountaines on that side also. vpon the
forenamed plaine there were wont to be great store of villages: but for the
most part they were all wasted, in regarde of the fertile pastures, that
the tartars might feede their cattel there. [sidenote: cailac a great city,
and full of merchants.] wee found one great citie there named cailac,
wherein was a mart, and great store of merchants frequenting it. in this
citie wee remained fifteene dayes, staying for a certaine scribe or
secretarie of baatu, who ought to haue accompanied our guide for a
despatching of certaine affaires in the court of mangu. all this countrey
was wont to be called organum: and the people thereof had their proper
language, and their peculiar kinde of writing. [sidenote: contomanni.] but
it was altogether inhabited of the people called contomanni. the nestorians
likewise in those parts vsed the very same kinde of language and writing.
they are called organa, because they were wont to be most skilfull in
playing vpon the organes or citherne, as it was reported vnto me. here
first did i see worshippers of idoles, concerning whom, bee it knowen vnto
your maiestie, that there be many sects of them in the east countries.


quod nestorini et saraceni sunt mixti et idolatra. cap. 26.

[sidenote: iugures populi, idolatra.] primi sunt iugures, quorum terra
contiguatur cum terra pradicta organum inter montes illos versus orientem:
et in omnibus ciuitatibus eorum sunt mixti nestorini et saraceni. et ipsi
etiam sunt diffusi versus persidem in ciuitatibus saracenorum. [sidenote:
cailac.] in pradicta ciuitate cailac habebant etiam ipsi tres idolatrias,
quarum duas intraui, vt viderem stultitias eorum. in prima inueni quendam,
qui habebat cruciculam de atramento super manum suam. vnde credidi quod
esset christianus: quia ad omnia qua querebam ab eo, respondebat vt
christianus. vnde quasiui ab eo: quare ergo non habetis crucem et imaginem
iesu christi? et ipse respondit, non habemus consuetudinem. vnde ego
credidi quod essent christiani: sed ex defectu doctrina omitterent. videbam
enim ibi post quandam cistam, qua erat eis loco altaris, super quam ponunt
lucernas et oblationes, quandam imaginationem habentem alas quasi sancti
michaelis: et alias quasi ipsorum tenentes digitos sicut ad benedieendum.
illo sero non potui aliud inuenire. quia saraceni in tantum inuitant eos,
quod nec etiam volunt loqui inde eis. vnde quando quarebam a saracenis de
ritu talium, ipsi scandalizabantur. in crastino fuerunt kalenda et pascha
saracenoram et mutaui hospitium: ita quod fui hospitatus prope aliam
idolatriam. homines enim colligunt nuncios, quilibet secundum posse suum
vel portionem suam. tunc intrans idolatriam pradictam inueni sacerdotes
idolorum. in kalendis enim aperiunt templa sua, et ornant se sacerdotes, et
offerunt populi oblationes de pane et fructibus. [sidenote: iugures secta
diuisa ab alijs idolatris.] primo ergo describo vobis ritus communes omnes
idolatrarum: et postea istorum iugurum; qui sunt quasi secta diuisa ab
alijs. omnes adorant ad aquilonem complosis manibus: et prosternentes se
genibus flexis ad terram, ponentes frontem super manus. vnde nestorini in
partibus illis nullo modo iungunt manus orando: sed orant extensis palmis
ante pectus. porrigunt templa sua ab oriente in occidentem: et in latere
aquilonari faciunt cameram vnam quasi eorum exeuntem: vel aliter, si est
domus quadrati, in medio domus ad latus aquilonare intercludunt vnam
cameram in loco chori. ibi ergo collocant vnam arcam longam et latam sicut
mensam vnam. [sidenote: fuit apud caracarum frater wilhelmus.] et post
illam arcam contra meridiem collocant principale idolum: quod ego vidi apud
caracarum, ita magnum sicut pingitur sanctus christopherus. et dixit mihi
quidam sacerdos nestorinus, qui venerat ex cataya, quod in terra illa est
idolum ita magnum, quod potest videri a duabus dietis. et collocant alia
idola in circuitu, omnia pulcherrime deaurata: super cistam illam, qua est
quasi mensa vna, ponunt lucernas et oblationes. omnes porta templorum sunt
aperta ad meridiem contrario modo saracenis. item habent campanas magnas
sicut nos. ideo credo quod orientales christiani noluerunt habere eas.
ruteni tamen habent et graci in gasaria.


the same in english.

how the nestorians, saracens, and idolaters are ioyned together. chap. 26.

[sidenote: the people called iugures idolaters.] the first sort of these
idolaters are called iugures: whose land bordereth vpon the foresaid land
of organum, within the said mountains eastward: and in al their cities
nestorians do inhabit together, and they are dispersed likewise towards
persia in the cities of the saracens. the citizens of the foresaid city of
cailac had 3. idole-temples: and i entred into two of them, to beholde
their foolish superstitions. in the first of which i found a man hauing a
crosse painted with ink vpon his hand, whereupon i supposed him to be a
christian: for he answered like a christian vnto al questions which i
demanded of him. and i asked him, why therefore haue you not the crosse
with the image of iesu christ thereupon? and he answered: we haue no such
custome. whereupon i coniectured that they were indeede christians: but,
that for lacke of instruction they omitted the foresaide ceremonie. for i
saw there behind a certaine chest (which was vnto them in steed of an
altar, whereupon they set candles and oblations) an image hauing wings like
vnto the image of saint michael, and other images also, holding their
fingers, as if they would blesse some body. that euening i could not find
any thing els. for the saracens doe onely inuite men thither, but they will
not haue them speake of their religion. and therfore, when i enquired of
the saracens concerning such ceremonies, they were offended thereat. on the
morrow after were the kalends, and the saracens feast of passeouer. and
changing mine inne or lodging the same day, i tooke vp mine abode neere
vnto another idole-temple. for the citizens of the said citie of cailac doe
curteously inuite, and louingly intertaine all messengers, euery man of
them according to his abilitie and portion. and entring into the foresaid
idole-temple, i found the priests of the said idoles there. for alwayes at
the kalends they set open their temples, and the priests adorne themselues,
and offer vp the peoples oblations of bread and fruits. first therefore i
will describe vnto you those rites and ceremonies, which are common vnto
all their idole-temples: and then the superstitions of the foresaid
iugures, which be, as it were, a sect distinguished from the rest they doe
all of them worship towards the north, clapping their hands together, and
prostrating themselues on their knees vpon the earth, holding also their
foreheads in their hands. wherupon the nestorians of those parts will in no
case ioyne their hands together in time of prayer: but they pray,
displaying their hands before their breasts. they extend their temples in
length east and west: and vpon the north side they build a chamber, in
maner of a vestry for themselues to goe forth into. or sometimes it is
otherwise. if it be a foure square temple, in the midst of the temple
towards the north side therof, they take in one chamber in that place where
the quire should stand. and within the said chamber they place a chest long
and broad like vnto a table: and behinde the saide chest towardes the south
stands their principall idole: which i sawe at caracaram, and it was as
bigge as the idole of saint christopher. [sidenote: frier william was at
caracarum.] also a certaine nestorian priest, which had bin in catay, saide
that in that countrey there is an idole of so huge a bignes, that it may be
seen two daies iourney before a man come at it. and so they place other
idoles round about the foresaid principal idole, being all of them finely
gilt ouer with pure golde: and vpon the saide chest, which is in manner of
a table, they set candles and oblations. the doores of their temples are
alwayes opened towards the south, contrary to the custome of the saracens.
they haue also great belles like vnto vs. and that is the cause (as i
thinke) why the christians of the east will in no case vse great belles.
notwithstanding they are common among the russians, and gracians of
gasaria.


de templis eorum et idolis, et qualiter se habent in officio deorum suorum.
  cap. 27.

omnes sacerdotes eorum rasum habent totum caput et barbam; sunt vestiti de
croceo, et seruant castitatem, ex quo radunt caput: et viuunt pariter
centum vel ducenti in vna congregatione. diebus quibus intrant templum,
ponunt duo scamna, et sedent e regione chorus contra chorum habentes libros
in manibus, quos aliquando deponunt super illa scamna: et habent capita
discooperta quandiu insunt in templo, legentes in silencio, et tenentes
silencium. vnde cum ingressus fuissem apud oratorium quoddam eorum, et
inuenissem eos ita sedentes, multis modis tentaui eos prouocare ad verba,
et nullo modo potui. habent etiam quocunque vadunt quendam restem centum
vel ducentorum nucleorum, sicut nos portamus pater noster: et dicunt semper
hac verba: ou mam hactani: hoc est, deus tu nosti; secundum quod quidem
eorum interpretatus est mihi. et toties expectant remunerationem a deo,
quoties hoc dicendo memoratur dei. circa templum suum semper faciunt
pulchrum atrium, quod bene includunt muro: et ad meridiem faciunt portam
magnam, in qua sedent ad colloquendum. et super illam portam erigunt
perticam longam, qua emineat si possint, super totam villam. et per illam
perticam potest cognosci, quod domus illa sit templum idolorum. ista
communia sunt omnibus idolatris. quando ergo ingressus fui pradictam
idolatriam, inueni sacerdotes sedentes sub porta exteriori. illi quos vidi,
videbantur mihi fratres franci esse rasis barbis. [sidenote: tyara
cartacea.] tyaras habebant in capitibus cartaceas. istorum iugurum
sacerdotes habent talem habitum quocunque vadunt: semper sunt in tunicis
croceis satis strictis accincti desuper recte sicut franci: et habent
pallium super humerum sinistrum descendens inuolutum per pectus et dorsum
ad latus dextrum sicut diaconus portans casulam in quadragesima. istorum
literas acceperunt tartari. [sidenote: chinenses ita etiam scribunt.] ipsi
incipiunt scribere sursum, et ducunt lineam deorsum, et, eodem modo ipsi
legunt et multiplicant lineas a sinistra ad dextram. [sidenote: sortilegi.]
isti multum vtuntur cartis et caracteribus pro sortilegio. vnde templa sua
plena sunt breuibus suspensis. et mangu-cham mittit vobis literas in
idiomate moal et literatura eorum. [sidenote: combustio mortuorum.] isti
comburunt mortuos suos secundum antiquum modum, et recondunt puluerem in
summitate pyramidis. cum ergo sedissem iuxta pradictos sacerdotes postquam
ingressus fueram templum et vidissem idola eorum multa magna et parua:
quasiui ab eis quid ipsi crederent de deo. qui responderunt, non credimus
nisi vnum deum. et ego quasiui: creditis quod ipse sit spiritus vel aliquid
corporale? dixerunt, credimus quod sit spiritus. et ego: creditis quod
nunquam sumpserit humanam naturam: dixerunt, minime. tunc ego: ex quo
creditis, quod non sit nisi vnus spiritus, quare facitis ei imagines
corporales et tot insuper? ex quo non creditis quod factus sit homo, quare
facitis ei magis imagines hominum, quam alterius animalis? tunc
responderunt, nos non figuramus istas imagines deo. sed quando aliquis
diues moritur ex nostris, vel filius, vel vxor, vel aliquis charus eius
facit fieri imaginem defuncti, et ponit eam hic: et nos veneramur eam ad
memoriam eius. quibus ego, tunc ergo non facitis ista nisi propter
adulationem hominum. immo dixerunt ad memoriam. tunc quasiuerunt a me quasi
deridendo: vbi est deus? quibus ego, vbi est anima vestra? dixerunt, in
corpore nostro. quibus ego, nonne est vbique in corpore tuo et totum regit,
et tamen non videtur? ita deus vbique est, et omnia gubernat, inuisibilis
tamen, quia intellectus et sapientia est. tunc cum vellem plura ratiocinari
cum illis, interpres meus fatigatus non valens verba exprimere, fecit me
tacere. istorum secta sunt moal siue tartari, quantum ad hoc, quod ipsi non
credunt nisi vnum deum: tamen faciunt de filtro imagines defunctorum
suorum, et induunt eas quinque pannis preciosissimis, et ponunt in vna biga
vel duabus, et illas bigas nullus audet tangere: et sunt sub custodia
diuinatorum suorum, qui sunt eorum sacerdotes, de quibus postea narrabo
vobis. isti diuinatores semper sunt ante curiam ipsius mangu et aliorum
diuitum: pauperes enim non habent eos; nisi illi qui sunt de genere
chingis. et cum debent bigare, ipsi pracedunt, sicut columna nubis filios
isral, et ipsi considerant locum metandi castra, et post deponunt domos
suas; et post eos tota curia. et tunc cum sit dies festus siue kalenda ipsi
extrahunt pradictas imagines et ponunt eas ordinate per circuitum in domo
sua. tunc veniunt moal et ingrediuntur domum illam, et inclinant se
imaginibus illis et venerantur illas. et illam domum nemini ingredi
extraneo licet: quadam enim vice volui ingredi et multum dure increpatus
fui.


the same in english.

of their temples and idoles: and howe they behaue themselues in worshipping
  their false gods. chap. 27.

all their priests had their heads and beards shauen quite ouer: and they
are clad in saffron coloured garments: and being once shauen, they lead an
vnmaried life from that time forward: and they liue an hundreth or two
hundreth of them together in one cloister or couent. vpon those dayes when
they enter into their temples, they place two long foormes therein:
[sidenote: bookes.] and so sitting vpon the sayd foormes like singing men
in a quier, namely the one halfe of them directly ouer against the other,
they haue certaine books in their hands, which sometimes they lay downe by
them vpon the foormes: and their heads are bare so long as they remaine in
the temple. and there they reade softly vnto themselues, not vttering any
voice at all. whereupon comming in amongst them, at the time of their
superstitious deuotions, and finding them all siting mute in maner
aforesayde, i attempted diuers waies to prouoke them vnto speach, and yet
could not by any means possible. they haue with them also whithersoeuer
they goe, a certaine string with an hundreth or two hundreth nutshels
thereupon, much like to our bead-roule which we cary about with vs. and
they doe alwayes vtter these words: _ou mam hactani_, god thou knowest: as
one of them expounded it vnto me. and so often doe they expect a reward at
gods hands, as they pronounce these words in remembrance of god. round
about their temple they doe alwayes make a faire court, like vnto a
churchyard, which they enuiron with a good wall: and vpon the south part
thereof they build a great portal, wherein they sit and conferre together.
and vpon the top of the said portall they pitch a long pole right vp,
exalting it, if they can, aboue all the whole towne besides. and by the
same pole all men may knowe, that there stands the temple of their idoles.
these rites and ceremonies aforesayd be common vnto all idolaters in those
parts. going vpon a time towards the foresayd idole-temple, i found certain
priests sitting in the outward portal. and those which i sawe, seemed vnto
me, by their shauen beards, as if they had bene french men. they wore
certaine ornaments vpon their heads made of paper. the priestes of the
foresaide iugures doe vse such attire whithersoeuer they goe. they are
alwaies in their saffron coloured iackets, which be very straight being
laced or buttened from the bosome right downe, after the french fashion.
and they haue a cloake vpon their left shoulder descending before and
behind vnder the right arme, like vnto a deacon carying the housselboxe in
time of lent. their letters or kind of writing the tartars did receiue.
[sidenote: paper. so do the people of china vse to write, drawing their
lines perpendicularly downward, and not as we doe from the right hand to
the lefte.] they begin to write at the top of their paper drawing their
lines right downe: and so they reade and multiply their lines from the left
hand to the right. they doe vse certaine papers and characters in their
magical practices. whereupon their temples are full of such short scroules
hanged round about them. also mangu-can hath sent letters vnto your
maiestie written in the language of the moals or tartars, and in the
foresayd hand or letter of the iugures. they burne their dead according to
the auncient custome, and lay vp the ashes in the top of a pyramis. now,
after i had sit a while by the foresaid priests, and entred into their
temple and seene many of their images both great and small, i demanded of
them what they beleeued concerning god? and they answered: we beleeue that
there is onely one god. and i demaunded farther: whether do you beleue that
he is a spirit, or some bodily substance? they saide: we beleeue that he is
a spirite. then said i: doe you beleeue that god euer tooke mans nature
vpon him? they answered: noe. and againe i said: sithence ye beleeue that
he is a spirit, to what end doe you make so many bodily images to represent
him? sithence also you beleeue not that hee was made man: why doe you
resemble him rather vnto the image of a man then of any other creature?
then they answered saying: we frame not these images whereby to represent
god. but when any rich man amongst vs, or his sonne, or his wife, or any of
his friends deceaseth, hee causeth the image of the dead party to be made,
and to be placed here: and we in remembrance of him doe reuerence
thereunto. then i replyed: you doe these things onely for the friendship
and flatterie of men. noe (said they) but for their memory. then they
demanded of me, as it were in scoffing wise: where is god? to whom i
answered: where is your soule? they said, in our bodies. then saide i, is
it not in euery part of your bodie, ruling and guiding the whole bodie, and
yet notwithstanding is not seene or perceiued? euen so god is euery where
and ruleth all things, and yet is he inuisible, being vnderstanding and
wisedome it selfe. then being desirous to haue had some more conference
with them, by reason that mine interpreter was weary, and not able to
expresse my meaning, i was constrained to keepe silence. the moals or
tartars are in this regard of their sect: namely they beleeue that there is
but one god: howbeit they make images of felt, in remembrance of their
deceased friends, couering them with fiue most rich and costly garments,
and putting them into one or two carts, which carts no man dare once touch:
and they are in the custody of their soothsayers, who are their priests,
concerning whom i will giue your highnesse more at large to vnderstand
hereafter. these soothsayers or diuiners do alwaies attend vpon the court
of mangu and of other great personages. as for the poorer or meaner sorte,
they haue them not, but such onely as are of the stocke and kindred of
chingis. and when they are to remoue or to take any iourney, the said
diuiners goe before them, euen as the cloudie piller went before the
children of israel. and they appoint ground where the tents must be
pitched, and first of al they take down their owne houses: and after them
the whole court doth the like. also vpon their festiual dates or kalends
they take forth the foresayd images, and place them in order round, or
circle wise within the house. then come the moals or tartars, and enter
into the same house, bowing themselues before the said images and worship
them. moreouer, it is not lawfull for any stranger to enter into that
house. for vpon a certaine time i my selfe would haue gone in, but i was
chidden full well for my labour.


de diuersis nationibus, et de illis qui comedere solebant parentes suos.
  cap. 28.

pradicti vero iugures, qui sunt mixti cum christianis et saracenis, per
frequentes disputationes, vt credo, peruenerunt ad hoc, quod non credunt
nisi vnum deum. et isti fuerunt habitantes in ciuitatibus, qui post
obediuerunt chingis cham: vnde ipse dedit regi eorum filiam suam.
[sidenote: patria presbiter iohannis.] et ipsa caracarum est quasi in
territorio eorum: et tota terra regis siue presbyteri iohannis et vut
fratris eius circa terras eorum; sed isti in pascuis ad aquilonem, illi
iugures inter montes ad meridiem. inde est quod ipsi moal sumpserunt
literas eorum. et ipsi sunt magni scriptores eorum: et omnes fere nestorim
sciunt literas eorum. [sidenote: tangut populi fortissimi.] post istos sunt
ipsi tangut ad orientem inter montes illos, homines fortissimi, qui
ceperunt chingis in bello. et pace facta dimissis ab eis, postea subiugauit
eos. [sidenote: boues pilosis caudis: his similes sunt in quinera america
septentrionalis prouincia.] isti habent boues fortissimos habentes caudas
plenas pilis sicut equi, et ventres pilosos et dorsa. bassiores sunt alijs
bobus in tibijs, sed ferociores multum. isti trahunt magnas domos
moallorum: et habent cornua gracilia, longa, acuosa, acutissima: ita quod
oportet semper secare summitates eorum. vacca non permittit se iniungi nisi
cantetur ei. habent etiam naturam bubali quia si vident hominem indutum
rubeis, insiliunt in eum volentes interficere. [sidenote: tebet populi.]
post illos sunt tebet homines solentes comedere parentes suos defunctos, vt
causa pietatis non facerent aliud sepulchrum eis nisi viscera sua. modo
tamen hoc dimiserunt, quia abominabiles erant omni nationi. tamen adhuc
faciunt pulcros ciphos de capitibus parentum, vt illis bibentes habeant
memoriam eorum in iocunditate sua. hoc dixit mihi qui viderat. isti habent
multum de auro in terra sua. [sidenote: auri abundantia.] vnde qui indiget
auro, fodit donec reperiat, et accipiat quando indiget, residuum condens in
terra: quia si reponeret in arca vel in thesauro, crederet quod deus
auferret ei aliud quod est in terra. de istis hominibus vidi personas
multum deformes. [sidenote: tangut homines magni sed fusci.] tangut vidi
homines magnos sed fuscos. iugures sunt mediocris statura sicut nostri.
apud iugures est fons et radix ideomatis turci et comanici. [sidenote:
langa et solanga.] post tebet sunt langa et solanga, quorum nuncios vidi in
curia: qui adduxerant magnas bigas plusquam decem, quarum qualibet
trahebatur sex bobus. [sidenote: solanisimiles hispanis, et fusci.] isti
sunt parui homines et fusci sicut hispani: et habent tunicas sicut
supertunicale diaconi manicis parum strictioribus: et habent in capitibus
mitras sicut episcopi. sed pars anterior est parum interior quam posterior,
et non terminatur in vnum angulum: sed sunt quadra desuper, et sunt de
stramine rigidato per calorem magnum, et limato in tantum, quod fulget ad
radium solis sicut speculum vel galea bene burnita. et circa tempora habent
longas bendas de eadem materia assutas ipsi mitra; qua se extendunt ad
ventum sicut duo cornua egredientia de temporibus. et quando ventus nimis
iactat eas plicant eas per medium mitra superius a tempore in tempus: et
iacent sicut circulus ex transuerso capitis. [sidenote: tabula de
elephantino.] et principalis nuncius quando veniebat ad curiam, habebat
tabulam de dente elephantino ad longitudinem vnius cubiti, et ad
latitudinem vnius palmi, rasam multum: et quandocunque loquebatur ipsi
cham, vel alicui magno viro, semper aspiciebat in illam tabulam, ac si
inueniret ibi ea qua dicebat: nec respiciebat ad dextram vel sinestram, nec
in faciem illius cui loquebatur. etiam accedens coram domino et recedens
nusquam respicit nisi in tabulam suam. [sidenote: muc populi.] vltra istos
sunt alij homines, vt intellexi pro vero, qui dicuntur muc, qui habent
villas, sed nulla animalia sibi appropriant: tamen sunt multi greges et
multa armenta in terra ipsorum, et nullos custodit ea. sed cum aliquis
indiget aliquo, ascendit collem et clamat, et omnia animalia audientia
clamorem accedunt circa illum, et permittunt se tractari quasi domestica.
et si nuncius vel aliquis extraneus accedat ad regionem illam, ipsi
includunt eum in domo, et ministrant ei necessaria, donec negocium eius
fuerit expeditum. quia si iret extraneus per regionem, animalia ad odorem
eius fugerent, et efficerentur syluestria. [sidenote: magna cathaya.] vltra
est magna cathaya, cuius incola antiquitus vt credo dicebantur seres. ab
ipsis enim veniunt optimi panni serici. et ille populus dicitur seres a
quodam oppido eorum. bene intellexi, quod in illa regione est oppidum
habens muros argenteos et propugnacula aurea. in ista terra sunt multa
prouincia, quarum plures adhuc non obediunt moallis. et inter [footnote:
_aliqua desiderantur_.]


the same in english.

of diuers and sundry nations: and of certaine people which
  were wont to eate their owne parents. chap. 28.

but the foresayd iugures (who liue among the christians, and the saracens)
by their sundry disputations as i suppose, haue bene brought vnto this, to
beleeue that there is but one onely god. and they dwelt in certaine cities,
which afterward were brought in subiection vnto chingis can: whereupon he
gaue his daughter in mariage vnto their king. [sidenote: the countrey of
presbiter iohn] also the citie of caracarum it selfe is in a manner within
their territory: and the whole countrey of king or presbyter iohn, and of
his brother vut lyeth neere vnto their dominions: sauing, that they
inhabite in certaine pastures northward and the sayde iugures betweene the
mountaines towardes the south. whereupon it came to passe, that the moals
receiued letters from them. and they are the tartars principall scribes and
al the nestorians almost can skill of their letters. [sidenote: tangut.]
next vnto them, between the foresaid mountaines eastward, inhabiteth the
nation of tangut, who are a most valiant people, and tooke chingis in
battell. but after the conclusion of a league hee was set at libertie by
them, and afterward subdued them. [sidenote: strange oxen.] these people of
tangut haue oxen of great strength, with tailes like vnto horses, and with
long shagge haire vpon their backes and bellyes. they haue legges greater
then other oxen haue, and they are exceedingly fierce. these oxen drawe the
great houses of the moals and their hornes are slender, long, streight, and
most sharpe pointed, insomuch that their owners are faine to cut off the
endes of them. a cowe will not suffer her selfe to be coupled vnto one of
them vnles they whistle or sing vnto her. they haue also the qualities of a
buffe: for if they see a man clothed in red, they run vpon him immediately
to kill him. [sidenote: the people of tebet.] next vnto them are the people
of tebet, men which were wont to eate the carkases of their deceased
parents that for pities sake, they might make no other sepulchre for them,
then their owne bowels. howbeit of late they haue left off this custome,
because that thereby they became abominable and odious vnto al other
nations. notwithstanding vnto this day they make fine cups of the skuls of
their parents, to the ende that when they drinke out of them, they may
amidst all their iollities and delights call their dead parents to
remembrance. this was tolde mee by one that saw it. [sidenote: abundance of
golde.] the sayd people of tebet haue great plentie of golde in their land.
whosoeuer therefore wanteth golde, diggeth till he hath found some
quantitie, and then taking so much thereof as will serue his turne, he
layeth vp the residue within the earth: because, if he should put it into
his chest or storehouse, hee is of opinion that god would withholde from
him all other gold within the earth. i sawe some of those people, being
very deformed creatures. [sidenote: the stature of the people of tangut,
and of the iugures.] in tangut i saw lusty tall men, but browne and swart
in colour. the iugures are of a middle stature like vnto our french men.
amongst the iugures is the originall and roote of the turkish, and comanian
languages. [sidenote: langa and solanga.] next vnto tebet are the people of
langa and solanga, whose messengers i saw in the tartars court. and they
had brought more than ten great cartes with them, euery one of which was
drawen with sixe oxen. [sidenote: the people of solanga resemble
spaniards.] they be little browne men like vnto spaniards. also they haue
iackets, like vnto the vpper vestment of a deacon, sauing that the sleeues
are somewhat streighter. and they haue miters vpon their heads like
bishops. but the fore part of their miter is not so hollow within as the
hinder part: neither is it sharpe pointed or cornered at the toppe: but
there hang downe certaine square flappes compacted of a kinde of strawe
which is made rough and rugged with extreme heat, and is so trimmed, that
it glittereth in the sunne beames, like vnto a glasse, or an helmet well
burnished. and about their temples they haue long bands of the foresayd
matter fastened vnto their miters, which houer in the wind, as if two long
hornes grewe out of their heads. and when the wind tosseth them vp and
downe too much, they tie them ouer the midst of their miter from one temple
to another: and so they lie circle wise ouerthwart their heads. [sidenote:
a table of elephants tooth.] moreouer their principal messenger comming
vnto the tartars court had a table of elephants tooth about him of a cubite
in length, and a handfull in breadth, being very smoothe. and whensoeuer
hee spake vnto the emperor himselfe, or vnto any other great personage, hee
alwayes beheld that table, as if hee had found therein those things which
hee spake: neither did he cast his eyes to the right hand, nor to the
lefte, nor vpon his face, with whom he talked. yea, going too and fro
before his lord, he looketh no where but only vpon his table. [sidenote:
the people called muc.] beyond them (as i vnderstand of a certainty) there
are other people called muc, hauing villages, but no one particular man of
them appropriating any cattell vnto himselfe. notwithstanding there are
many flockes and droues of cattell in their countrey, and no man appointed
to keepe them. but when any one of them standeth in neede of any beast, hee
ascendeth vp vnto an hill, and there maketh a shout, and all the cattel
which are within hearing of the noyse, come flocking about him, and suffer
themselues to be handled and taken, as if they were tame. and when any
messenger or stranger commeth into their countrie, they shut him vp into an
house, ministring there things necessary vnto him, vntill his businesse be
despatched. for if anie stranger should trauell through that countrie, the
cattell would flee away at the very sent of him, and so would become wilde.
[sidenote: great cathaya.] beyond muc is great cathaya, the inhabitants
whereof (as i suppose) were of olde time, called seres. for from them are
brought most excellent stuffes of silke. and this people is called seres of
a certame towne in the same countrey. i was crediblie informed, that in the
said countrey, there is one towne hauing walls of siluer, and bulwarkes or
towers of golde. there be many prouinces in that land, the greater part
whereof are not as yet subdued vnto the tartars. and amongst [footnote:
somewhat is wanting.]