



produced by dan dyckman




________________________
  transcriber's comments

where hebrew letters appeared within the english text, these have been
transliterated and included in brackets.  in many cases the hebrew has
also been spelled out, thus:
   [tov (tet-vov-bet)].

a rare additional transcriber's note may be found within brackets [].

the source text contained only one comment in a bracket, that should
not be confused as a transcriber's note.  this is the word [baden]
that appeared in the bibliography.

each [s] is the special character known as "section sign."

where the source text referenced a page number within the same book,
the transcriber substituted a reference in brackets [] that will be
useful for readers of this e-text version.

the source book contained the complete pirkei avot, in hebrew, with
vowels.  this has, of necessity, been omitted from the current
e-text document, which uses only roman font.

footnotes all appeared at the bottom of the page, separated by a line
from the main text, and printed in the same font and size as the main
text.  the transcriber has moved these footnotes to follow the
paragraph they supplement, and indented them.

at the end of this e-text, readers will find a section titled
transcription notes which deals with issues such as accent marks.

following this, readers will find a page reference index.  this
reference will help maintain the stability of references to this
book from outside sources.

end of transcriber's comments





 library of jewish classics
 ==========================

 i. leopold zunz: the sufferings of the jews during the middle ages
 ii. hyman hurwitz: talmudic tales
 iii. "pirek abot": the sayings of the jewish fathers





     library of jewish classics-iii.
 ________________________________________

           the sayings of the
             jewish fathers

             [pirkei avot]
              "pirke abot"
 ________________________________________

           translated, with an
         introduction and notes

                  by
       joseph i. gorfinkle, ph.d.

               author of
 "the eight chapters of maimonides on ethics"

                _______

           _second edition_

 ________________________________________



              contents
   preface
   introduction
      name
      purpose
      description
      contents
      language
      development of abot
      abot in liturgy
      bibliography
   chapter   i
   chapter  ii
   chapter iii
   chapter  iv
   chapter   v
   chapter  vi
   hebrew text (appendix)









         preface

notwithstanding the fact that there are many editions of the _sayings
of the jewish fathers_, and that it has been translated innumerable
times in all modern tongues, no apology need be given for the
appearance of this little volume in the series of _jewish classics_.
the _pirke abot_ is indeed a classical bit of that ancient jewish
classic, the _mishnah_.

the translation in this edition is based largely upon that of taylor,
in his _sayings of the jewish fathers_, and upon the excellent version
of singer, in his _authorized daily prayer book_.

this edition is intended mainly for popular reading, but it has been
thought wise to amplify the notes, especially with bibliographical
references, so that it may serve the purpose of a teacher's handbook,
and also be useful as a text-book for the higher grades of religious
schools and for study circles.  the references are to books that are
generally accessible, and, wherever possible, to books in english.
the notes are by no means intended to be exhaustive, but rather to be
suggestive.

it is the humble hope of the editor that this little book may be the
means of further popularizing the practical and, at the same time,
high-minded wisdom of the "fathers"; that it may serve as an incentive
to a more detailed study of their philosophy of life, and that its
appearance may help us to lead in a revival of that most ancient and
praiseworthy custom of reading the _pirke abot_ in the house of
worship on the sabbath, during the summer months.  let him into whose
hands these sayings fall "meditate upon them day and night," for "he
who would be saintly must fulfil the dicta of the fathers."

            joseph i gorfinkle.

mt. vernon, n. y.
   february, 1913.







            introduction

                name

_the tractate abot_ (_massechet abot_) is the ninth treatise of _the
order_ or _series on damages_ (_seder nezikin_), which is the fourth
section of the _mishnah_ (1).  it is commonly known in hebrew as
_pirke abot_, _the chapters of the fathers_, and has also been termed
_mishnat ha-chasidim_, _instruction for the pious_, because of the
rabbinic saying, "he who wishes to be pious, let him practise the
teachings of _abot_" (2).  on account of the nature of its contents,
it is generally designated in english as the _ethics of the fathers_.
taylor entitles his edition _dibre aboth ha-olam_, sayings of the
fathers of the world_, and has as the english title, _sayings of the
jewish fathers_.  gustav gottheil refers to the _abot_ as the _sayings
of the pharisaic fathers_ (3).  its german title is generally _die
spruche der vater_, and in french it is usually rendered _chapitres_
or _maximes des peres_.

      (1) see _infra_, [chapter v], n. 61.

      (2) _baba kamma_, 30a.  see taylor, _sayings of the jewish
      fathers_, p. 3.  maimonides refers to this saying in the
      _foreword_ of his _eight chapters_; see gorfinkle, _the eight
      chapters_, etc., p. 34.

      (3) see _sun and shield_, p. 321 _et passim_.  see _infra_, n.
      8, which accounts for the use of "_pharisaic_."

the use of the word _abot_ (fathers), in the title, is of very ancient
date.  we can only guess at the reason for its being used, and,
consequently, there are various explanations for it.  samuel de uceda,
in his collective commentary, says that as this tractate of the
_mishnah_ contains the advice and good counsel, which, for the most
part, come from a father, the rabbis mentioned in it adopt the role of
"fathers," and are therefore so designated.  this explanation does
not, however, deter him from advancing another to the effect that this
treatise is the basis of all subsequent ethical and moral teachings
and doctrines, and the rabbis are, in consequence, the "fathers" or
prototypes of all ethical teachers and moralists (4).  loeb attributes
its use to the fact that the rabbis of _abot_ are the "fathers" or
"ancestors of rabbinic judaism" (5).  hoffman states that the word
_abot_ means "teachers of tradition" (_traditionslehrer_), and points
to the expression _abot ha-olam_ (_eduyot_, i. 4), which, translated
literally, is "fathers of the world," but is used to designate the
most distinguished teachers, which is a true characterization of the
rabbis of _abot_ (6).  taylor says in regard to the title, "it takes
its name from the fact that it consists to a great extent of the
maxims of the jewish fathers whose names are mentioned in the pages"
(7).  hoffmann's seems the most acceptable explanation.

      (4) _midrash shemuel_ (ed. warsaw, 1876), p. 6.  the _midrash
      shemuel_ is a collective commentary, first published in venice
      in 1579, and which has since passed through six editions.  see
      p. 22, n. 21.

      (5) _la chaine_, etc., p. 307, n. 1.

      (6) see hoffman, _seder nesikin, introd._, p. xx, and p. 258,
      n. 36.  in this passage of _eduyot_, hillel and shammai are
      referred to as _abot ha-olam_; in _yerushalmi shekalim_, iii,
      47b, rabbi and ishmael and rabbi akiba, and in _yerushalmi
      chagigah_, ii, 77d, all the pairs of _abot_ i are similarly
      designated.

      (7) taylor, _loc. cit._




            purpose

the original aim of _abot_ was to show the divine source and authority
of the traditional law revealed to moses on mt. sinai, and to
demonstrate its continuity from moses through joshua, the elders, and
the men of the great synagogue, down to those rabbis who lived during
the period between 200 b.c.e. to 200 c.e.  loeb maintains that _abot_
was originally a composition of the pharisaic rabbis who wished to
indicate that the traditions held and expounded by them, and which the
sadducees repudiated, were divine and, in time and sequence,
uninterruptedly authoritative (8).  this line of continuous tradition
is plainly seen in the first two chapters.  a second and probably
later purpose was to present a body of practical maxims and aphorisms
for the daily guidance of the people.


      (8) _la chaine_, etc.  the sadducees belonged to the priestly
      and aristocratic families.  they made light of the oral
      traditions, did not believe in the future life, and were
      indifferent to the independence of the jewish nation.  the
      pharisees, on the other hand, were constituted largely from
      the common people; they were believers in, and strict
      observers of, the traditional laws, and were ardent
      nationalists.  the bitter attack of jesus on them, which has
      resulted in making the word "pharisee" synonymous with
      "hypocrite" and "self-righteous person," was, to say the
      least, unjust, as herford has so lucidly pointed out in his
      sympathetic study of the pharisees.  herford, though not a
      jew, has taken up the cudgels most ably in defence of this
      sect, with remarkable insight into the life and literature of
      the ancient jews.  he demonstrates conclusively that though
      there were hypocrites among the pharisees, as among all
      classes and creeds, yet the average pharisee was a man of the
      most elevated religious ideals, who misunderstood jesus, but
      who, in turn was misunderstood by him.  huxley, in his
      _evolution of theology_, says, "of all the strange ironies in
      history, perhaps the strangest is that 'pharisee' is current
      as a term of reproach among the theological descendants of
      that sect of nazarenes who, without the martyr spirit of those
      primitive puritans, would never have come into existence."
      such great teachers and men of sterling quality and golden
      utterance as antigonus of soko (i, 3), hillel (i, 12-14; ii,
      5-8), jochanan ben zakkai (ii, 9-19), gamaliel, whose pupil
      was paul, the apostle (i, 16), and judah, the prince (ii, 1),
      whose sayings grace the pages of _abot_, were, as loeb points
      out, of the pharisaic school or party.  there is naturally a
      large literature on the pharisees.  herford's _pharisaism_
      deserves careful perusal.  see, also, josephus (ed.
      whiston-margoliouth), _antiq._, xiii, 10.6, xviii, 1, 2-4;
      schurer, _history of the jews_, etc., ii, ii, p. 14 _et seq._;
      _jewish encyclopedia_ and literature mentioned there; geiger,
      _judaism and its history_, p. 102 _et seq._, and friedlander,
      g., _the jewish sources of the sermon on the mount_, p. 34 _et
      seq._




         description

the _sayings of the jewish fathers_ is the oldest collection of
ethical dicta of the rabbis of the _mishnah_ (9).  it is a rabbinic
anthology.  it has been happily styled "a compendium of practical
ethics" (10), and, as mielziner has said, "these rabbinical sentences,
if properly arranged, present an almost complete code of human duties"
(11).  the _abot_ is, then, a sort of moral code.

      (9) there was another, and apparently older, recension of
      _pirke abot_ on which is based the _abot de-rabbi natan_, an
      _hagadic_ or homiletical exposition of _abot_.  two recensions
      of _abot de-rabbi natan_ exist, and have been edited by
      schechter.  on this work, see hoffman, _die erste mischna_, p.
      26 _et seq._, mielziner, article _abot de-rabbi natan_, in
      _jewish encyclopedia_, strack, _einleitung_, p. 69 _et seq.,
      and pollak, _rabbi nathans system_, etc., _introduction_, pp.
      7-9.  an english translation is found in rodkinson's edition
      of the _talmud_, vol. v, p. 1 _et seq._

      (10) taylor, _loc. cit._  lazarus, _ethics of judaism_, ii.
      113, calls it "a compendium of ethics."

      (11) in _jewish encyclopedia_, art. _abot_.




         contents

even a superficial reading of _abot_ will bring home to one the fact
that it is made up of various strata.  in fact, it falls naturally
into the following strands or divisions:

a. chapter i, 1-15: chronologically arranged sayings of the oldest
        authorities, from the men of the great synagogue to hillel
        and shammai.

b. (1) chapters i, 16-ii, 4: sayings of the men of the school of
        hillel to rabban gamaliel (about 230 c.e.), the son of judah
        ha-nasi

   (2) chapter ii, 5-8: additional sayings of hillel.

c. (1) chapter ii, 9-19: the sayings of jochanan ben zakkai, the
        pupil of hillel, and of his disciples.

   (2) chapter ii, 20-21: the sayings of rabbi tarfon, a younger
        contemporary of jochanan ben zakkai.

d. chapter iii: the maxims of seventeen _tannaim_ (authorities
        mentioned in the _mishnah_) to the time of and including
        rabbi akiba.  these are not arranged in strictly
        chronological order.

e. chapter iv: the sayings of twenty-five _tannaim_ after the time
        of rabbi akiba, who were contemporaries of rabbi meir and of
        rabbi judah ha-nasi.  these are not chronologically arranged.

f. (1) chapter v, 1-18: anonymous sayings forming a series of groups
        of ten, seven, and four things, dealing with the creation of
        the world, with miracles, and with the varieties of men and
        minds.

   (2) chapter v, 19-22: anonymous sayings touching upon the
        varieties of motives and contrasting the good and evil
        dispositions.

   (3) chapter v, 23: sayings of judah ben tema.

   (4) chapter v, 24: the ages of man.

   (5) chapter v, 25, 26: the sayings of ben bag bag and of ben he
        he.

g. chapter vi: the acquisition of the _torah;_ praise of the
        _torah_.



         language

the language of _abot_ is easy mishnaic hebrew, with portions of four
verses (i, 13; ii, 7; v, 25, and v, 26) in aramaic, which is closely
related to hebrew.  it is worthy of note that these aramaic portions
originated with the school of hillel (12).

      (12) on the language of the _mishnah_, see mielziner,
      _introduction to the talmud_, pp. 15-16, and lauterbach in
      _jewish encyclopedia_, vol ii, p. 614.  on the use of aramaic
      in the _mishnah_, see schurer, _history_, i, ii, p. 8 _et
      seq._, and bacher, in _jewish encyclopedia_, art. _aramaic
      language among the jews_.  several centuries before the common
      era, aramaic was the vernacular of the jews.  hebrew, however,
      remained in use as the sacred language ([lashon ha-kodesh]),
      it being the language of the learned, and was employed for
      literary, liturgical, and legal purposes.  this accounts for
      the mishnah being written almost entirely in hebrew, though
      aramaic was spoken on the streets.  it is related of judah
      ha-nasi that he disliked the aramaic jargon to such an extent
      that he forbade its use in his home, where even the servants
      spoke hebrew with elegance (_rosh ha-shanah_, 26b).  when
      scholars used aramaic in his presence, he chided them for not
      speaking in hebrew or in greek (_baba kamma_, 82b).




         development of abot (13)

      (13) on the subject-matter of this section, consult hoffmann,
      _die erste mischna_, pp. 26-37; idem, _mischnaiot seder
      nesikin_, _introd._, pp. xx-xxi; brull, _enstehung und
      ursprunglicher inhalt des traktates abot;_ loeb, _la chaine_,
      etc.; ginzburg, _spruche der vater, erstes capitel historisch
      beleuchtet_ (liepzig, 1889); strack, _die spruche der vater_,
      _introd._, pp. 7-8; idem, _einleitung_, p. 52, and rawicz,
      _commentar des maimonides_, p. 105, n. 3.

it is apparent from the literary construction of _abot_ that it has
been edited several times, and that, in its earliest form, the
_abot_ collection was much smaller than we have it to-day.  originally,
probably shortly after the time of hillel, it may have been merely a
sort of appendix to the _tractate sanhedrin_, with typical sayings of
each of the heads of the _sanhedrin_.  these dicta are contained in
what is designated as section a.  later, presumably by rabbi akiba,
there were added to this original kernel of _abot_ the sayings of
rabbi jochanan ben zakkai and his most illustrious pupils, which
comprise section c.  this resulted in the grouping together of the
sayings of ten generations of traditional authorities, as follows:
(1) the men of the great synagogue, (2) simon, the just, (3) antigonus
of soko, (4) jose ben joezer and jose ben jochanan, (5) joshua ben
perachiah and nittai, the arbelite, (6) judah ben tabbai and simeon
ben shatach, (7) shemaiah and abtalion, (8) hillel and shammai, (9)
jochanan ben zakkai, and (10) the latter's disciples.  by association
of idea with this number ten, there were added to this collection
numerical sayings of ten, and, then, others of seven and four, found
in chapter v, 1-9 and 10-13.

into this enlarged kernel of pithy sayings of the oldest authorities,
which may be characterized as the _abot of rabbi akiba_, later
_tannaim_--rabbi meir, rabbi judah ha-nasi, and others--interpolated
additional sayings of the afore-mentioned rabbis, and also typical
utterances of their disciples, and of other well-known teachers.  this
accounts for the presence in _abot_ of the body of maxims of the six
generations of the school of hillel, designated above as section b 1,
and which was very properly introduce after the aphorisms of hillel
and of his contemporary, shammai.  the thread of tradition being
interrupted by this interpolation, it was again taken up by the
introduction of another body of hillel's sayings (b 2), thus providing
for a natural transition from hillel to jochanan ben zakkai.  proof of
the fact that section b is an addition is that in the _abot de-rabbi
natan_--which, as has been said above, is based on an older version of
_abot_ (14)--the sayings of jochanan ben zakkai follow immediately
upon those of shammai.  the sayings of judah ha-nasi, the redactor of
the _mishnah_, and of rabbi gamaliel, his son, were undoubtedly added
after the time of judah.

      (14) see _supra_, p. 13, n. 9.

chapter iii contains the sayings of authorities who were the
predecessors of judah, the first two having lived before the
destruction of the second temple.  chapter iv is made up of the dicta
of a number of rabbis who were contemporaries of judah.  these two
chapters were, no doubt, inserted by judah, the redactor of the
_mishnah_ as we virtually have it to-day.  evidence that chapter iv is
an addition to the original _abot_ is that it has a number of
aphorisms which are repetitions of some found in chapters i and ii.
the greater part of chapter v, as stated above, was a portion of the
_abot_ of rabbi akiba.

chapter vi, which is known as _the chapter on the acquisition of
torah_ (_perek kinyan torah_), as _the external teaching of the abot_
(_baraita de-abot_) (15), as _the chapter of rabbi meir_ (_perek rabbi
meir_) (16), and as _the external teaching of rabbi meir_ (_baraita
de-rabbi meir_), is a supplement of the treatise _abot_, as is claimed
for it by its superscription, "the sages taught in the language of the
_mishnah_," a formula generally used in the _talmud_ to introduce a
_baraita_.  one of the authorities mentioned in it is joshua ben levi,
a palestinian _amora_ (an authority of the _gemara_) who lived during
the third century.  this demonstrates the comparatively late date of
the final redaction of this chapter.  by the middle of the ninth
century it formed a part of the treatise _abot_.  it was added to the
prayer-book to be read on the sixth sabbath of the period between
passover and the festival of weeks (_shebuot_) (17).

      (15) a _baraita_ contains traditions and opinions of
      authorities of the _mishnah_ which are not embodied in the
      _mishnah_ or rabbi judah ha-nasi.  see mielziner,
      _introduction to the talmud_, pp. 20-21, strack, _einleitung
      in den talmud_, p. 3, and the _jewish encyclopedia_, _s.v._  a
      _gemara_ (talmudical commentary) to the _baraita de-abot_ was
      published from a ms. by coronel in _chamishah kuntresin_
      (vienna, 1864).  this _baraita_ is found also in the
      seventeenth chapter of _tanna de-be eliyahu sutta_, but with
      different textual readings.  see ginzberg, in the _jewish
      encyclopedia_, ii, pp. 516-517.

      (16) known thus because rabbi meir's name is found in the
      first verse.

      (17) see next section.  the sixth chapter is found in some
      editions of the _mishnah_.



         abot in the liturgy (18)

      (18) on the subject-matter of this section, see the citation
      from the sar shalom gaon, in the _siddur_ of r. amram, 30a;
      _midrash shemual_, pp. 3-4; zunz, _die ritus_, pp. 85-86;
      strack, _die spruche der vater_, p. 5, and _siddur_, ed. baer,
      p. 271, note.  other portions of the _mishnah_ and also of the
      _talmud_ that are included in the liturgy are, in the morning
      service, _zebachim_ v (_siddur_, ed. singer, p. 11); in the
      evening service for the sabbath, _sabbat_, ii (pp. 120-122),
      and, from the _talmud_, end of _berachot_ (p. 122); in the
      additional service for sabbath and festivals, from the _talmud
      keritot_, 6a, from the _mishnah_, end of _tamid_, and from the
      _talmud_, end of _berachot_ (pp. 167-168).

as taylor has said, "its simplicity and intrinsic excellence have
secured for _abot_ a widespread and lasting popularity, and have led
to its being excerpted from the _talmud_ and used liturgically in the
synagogue, at certain seasons, from an early period" (19).  thus, the
_abot_ is found not only in all editions of the _mishnah_ and the
_talmud_, but also in the prayer-books of the ashkenazic rite (20).
the practice of reading a chapter from _abot_, on saturday, after the
afternoon prayer (_minchah_), originated as early as gaonic times
(seventh to eleventh centuries).  during the middle of the ninth
century, _abot_ and its _baraita_ were thus liturgically used.  in
spanish communities it was recited in the morning of the sabbath, and
not in the afternoon.  by the eleventh century, this custom was
universally a part of the synagogal service.

      (19) taylor, _loc. cit._

      (20) german and polish.


originally, _abot_ was probably read only from passover to _shebuot;_
and, since this period has generally six sabbaths, and there are only
five chapters of _abot_, the chapter _kinyan torah_ was appointed to
be read on the sixth sabbath.  later, the period of the year in which
_abot_ was read varied in different communities.  in germany, there
were _kehillot_ in which it was recited during the winter as well as
during the summer.  in some communities it was read from passover to
the feast of tabernacles (_sukkot_), in others from the sabbath of
_parashah yitro_ (ex. xviii, 1-xx, 26) to the sabbath of _parashah
masse'e_ (num. xxxiii, 1-xxxvi, 13), that is, from the sabbath on
which is read an account of the giving of the law until the sabbath
preceding the beginning of the reading of the "repetition of the law,"
_i.e._, deuteronomy.  in many orthodox congregations to-day this
practice is still adhered to, and _abot_ is read on sabbath afternoons
during the summer, or from the sabbath after passover to the sabbath
before the new year (_rosh ha-shanah_).

a number of reasons have been suggested for the custom of reading the
_abot_ in the synagogue, the most likely being that it was introduced
to occupy the minds of worshippers during the long wait, on a summer's
day, between the afternoon and evening services.  whatever the reason
for this custom may have been is immaterial and unimportant; but what
is of importance is that, by this excellent practice, a whole body of
moral dicta--each one summing up with remarkable conciseness a life's
experience and philosophy, each one breathing the spirit of piety,
saintliness, justice, and love for humanity--has sunk deeply into the
innermost heart and consciousness of the jewish people, exerting such
an influence that the principles set forth in the _abot_ have been
eternally wrought into the moral fibre of the descendants of the
rabbis.  to the lips of the jew, these maxims spring spontaneously; to
those who know them they are a safe and secure guide through life;
they are not only heard in the synagogue, but are quoted and applied
at home and abroad.  such are the fruits of a benign custom, which
israel will do well to prize and preserve.



         bibliography

because of its great popularity, the _pirke abot_ has appeared in many
editions.  there is no _gemara_ (talmudic commentary) on the _abot_,
which undoubtedly accounts for the numerous commentaries on it (21).
because of the attractiveness of its contents, and since it forms a
part of the ritual, it has been translated many times into many
tongues (22), and a great deal has been written on it.  the following