
introduction

the story of modern times is but a small fraction of the long epic of
human history. if, as seems highly probable, the conservative estimates
of recent scientists that mankind has inhabited the earth more than
fifty thousand years [footnote: professor james geikie, of the
university of edinburgh, suggests, in his _antiquity of man in
europe_ (1914), the possible existence of human beings on the earth
more than 500,000 years ago!], are accurate, then the bare five hundred
years which these volumes pass in review constitute, in time, less than
a hundredth part of man's past. certainly, thousands of years before
our day there were empires and kingdoms and city-states, showing
considerable advancement in those intellectual pursuits which we call
civilization or culture,--that is, in religion, learning, literature,
political organization, and business; and such basic institutions as
the family, the state, and society go back even further, past our
earliest records, until their origins are shrouded in deepest mystery.
despite its brevity, modern history is of supreme importance. within
its comparatively brief limits are set greater changes in human life
and action than are to be found in the records of any earlier
millennium. while the present is conditioned in part by the deeds and
thoughts of our distant forbears who lived thousands of years ago, it
has been influenced in a very special way by historical events of the
last five hundred years. let us see how this is true.

suppose we ask ourselves in what important respects the year 1900
differed from the year 1400. in other words, what are the great
distinguishing achievements of modern times? at least six may be noted:

(1) _exploration and knowledge of the whole globe_. to our
ancestors from time out of mind the civilized world was but the lands
adjacent to the mediterranean and, at most, vague stretches of persia,
india, and china. not much over four hundred years ago was america
discovered and the globe circumnavigated for the first time, and very
recently has the use of steamship, telegraph, and railway served to
bind together the uttermost parts of the world, thereby making it
relatively smaller, less mysterious, and in culture more unified.

(2) _higher standards of individual efficiency and comfort_. the
physical welfare of the individual has been promoted to a greater
degree, or at all events preached more eloquently, within the last few
generations than ever before. this has doubtless been due to changes in
the commonplace everyday life of all the people. it must be remembered
that in the fifteenth century man did the ordinary things of life in
much the same manner as did early romans or greeks or egyptians, and
that our present remarkable ways of living, of working, and of
traveling are the direct outcome of the commercial revolution of the
sixteenth century and of the industrial revolution of the nineteenth.

(3) _intensification of political organization, with attendant public
guarantees of personal liberties_. the ideas of nationalism and of
democracy are essentially modern in their expression. the notion that
people who speak the same language and have a common culture should be
organized as an independent state with uniform laws and customs was
hardly held prior to the fifteenth century. the national states of
england, france, and spain did not appear unmistakably with their
national boundaries, national consciousness, national literature, until
the opening of the sixteenth century; and it was long afterwards that
in italy and germany the national idea supplanted the older notions of
world empire or of city-state or of feudalism. the national state has
proved everywhere a far more powerful political organization than any
other: its functions have steadily increased, now at the expense of
feudalism, now at the expense of the church; and such increase has been
as constant under industrial democracy of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries as under the benevolent despotism of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries. but in measure as government has enlarged its
scope, the governed have worked out and applied protective principles
of personal liberties. the puritan revolution, the french revolution,
the american revolution, the uprisings of oppressed populations
throughout the nineteenth century, would be quite inexplicable in other
than modern times. in fact the whole political history of the last four
centuries is in essence a series of compromises between the conflicting
results of the modern exaltation of the state and the modern exaltation
of the individual.

(4) _replacement of the idea of the necessity of uniformity in a
definite faith and religion by toleration of many faiths or even of no
faith_. a great state religion, professed publicly, and financially
supported by all the citizens, has been a distinguishing mark of every
earlier age. whatever else may be thought of the protestant movement of
the sixteenth century, of the rise of deism and skepticism in the
seventeenth and eighteenth, and of the existence of scientific
rationalism in the nineteenth and twentieth, there can be little doubt
that each of them has contributed its share to the prevalence of the
idea that religion is essentially a private, not a public, affair and
that friendly rivalry in good works is preferable to uniformity in
faith.

(5) _diffusion of learning_. the invention of printing towards the
close of the fifteenth century gradually revolutionized the pursuit of
knowledge and created a real democracy of letters. what learning might
have lost in depth through its marvelous broadening has perhaps been
compensated for by the application of the keenest minds in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to experimental science and in our
own day to applied science.

(6) _spirit of progress and decline of conservatism_. for better
or for worse the modern man is intellectually more self-reliant than
his ancestors, more prone to try new inventions and to profit by new
discoveries, more conscious and therefore more critical of conditions
about him, more convinced that he lives in a better world than did his
fathers, and that his children who come after him should have a better
chance than he has had. this is the modern spirit. it is the product of
all the other elements of the history of five hundred years--the larger
geographical horizon, the greater physical comfort, the revolutionized
political institutions, the broader sympathies, the newer ideals of
education. springing thus from events of the past few centuries, the
modern spirit nevertheless looks ever forward, not backward. a debtor
to the past, it will be doubly creditor to the future. it will
determine the type of individual and social betterment through coming
centuries. such an idea is implied in the phrase, "the continuity of
history"--the ever-flowing stream of happenings that brings down to us
the heritage of past ages and that carries on our richer legacies to
generations yet unborn.

from such a conception of the continuity of history, the real
significance of our study can be derived. it becomes perfectly clear
that if we understand the present we shall be better prepared to face
the problems and difficulties of the future. but to understand the
present thoroughly, it becomes necessary not only to learn what are its
great features and tendencies, but likewise how they have been evolved.
now, as we have already remarked, six most important characteristics of
the present day have been developed within the last four or five
centuries. to follow the history of this period, therefore, will tend
to familiarize us both with present-day conditions and with future
needs. this is the genuine justification for the study of the history
of modern times.

modern history may conveniently be defined as that part of history
which deals with the origin and evolution of the great distinguishing
characteristics of the present. no precise dates can be assigned to
modern history as contrasted with what has commonly been called ancient
or medieval. in a sense, any division of the historical stream into
parts or periods is fundamentally fallacious: for example, inasmuch as
the present generation owes to the greeks of the fourth century before
christ many of its artistic models and philosophical ideas and very few
of its political theories, the former might plausibly be embraced in
the field of modern history, the latter excluded therefrom. but the
problem before us is not so difficult as may seem on first thought. to
all intents and purposes the development of the six characteristics
that have been noted has taken place within five hundred years. the
sixteenth century witnessed the true beginnings of the change in the
extensive world discoveries, in the establishment of a recognized
european state system, in the rise of protestantism, and in the
quickening of intellectual activity. it is the foundation of modern
europe.

the sixteenth century will therefore be the general subject of part i
of this volume. after reviewing the geography of europe about the year
1500, we shall take up in turn the _four_ factors of the century
which have had a lasting influence upon us: (1) socially and
economically--the commercial revolution; (2) politically--european
politics in the sixteenth century; (3) religiously and
ecclesiastically--the protestant revolt; (4) intellectually--the
culture of the sixteenth century.


additional reading


the study of history. on historical method: c. v. langlois and charles
seignobos, _introduction to the study of history_, trans. by g. g.
berry (1912); j. m. vincent, _historical research: an outline of theory
and practice_ (1911); h. b. george, _historical evidence_ (1909); f. m.
fling, _outline of historical method_ (1899). different views of
history: j. h. robinson, _the new history_ (1912), a collection of
stimulating essays; j. t. shotwell, suggestive article _history_ in
11th edition of _encyclopaedia britannica_; t. b. macaulay, essay on
_history_; thomas carlyle, _heroes and hero worship_; karl lamprecht,
_what is history_? trans. by e. a. andrews (1905). also see henry
johnson, _the teaching of history_ (1915); eduard fueter, _geschichte
der neueren historiographie_ (1911); ernst bernheim, _lehrbuch der
historischen methode und der geschichtsphilosophie_, 5th ed. (1914); g.
p. gooch, _history and historians in the nineteenth century_ (1913).

textbooks and manuals of modern history. j. h. robinson and c. a.
beard, _the development of modern europe_, 2 vols. (1907), a political
and social narrative from the time of louis xiv, and by the same
authors, _readings in modern european history_, 2 vols. (1908-1909), an
indispensable sourcebook, with critical bibliographies; ferdinand
schevill, _a political history of modern europe from the reformation to
the present day_ (1907); t. h. dyer, _a history of modern europe from
the fall of constantinople_, 3d ed. revised and continued to the end of
the nineteenth century by arthur hassall, 6 vols. (1901), somewhat
antiquated but still valuable for its vast store of political facts;
victor duruy, _history of modern times from the fall of constantinople
to the french revolution_, trans. by e. a. grosvenor (1894), verbose
and somewhat uncritical, but usable for french history. more up-to-date
series of historical manuals are now appearing or are projected by
henry holt and company under the editorship of professor c. h. haskins,
by the century company under professor g. l. burr, by ginn and company
under professor j. h. robinson, and by houghton mifflin company under
professor j. t. shotwell: such of these volumes as have appeared are
noted in the appropriate chapter bibliographies following. the
macmillan company has published _periods of european history,_ 8 vols.
(1893-1901), under the editorship of arthur hassall, of which the last
five volumes treat of political europe from 1494 to 1899; and a more
elementary political series, _six ages of european history_, 6 vols.
(1910), under the editorship of a. h. johnson, of which the last three
volumes cover the years from 1453 to 1878. much additional information
is obtainable from such popular series as _story of the nations_ (1886
_sqq._), _heroes of the nations_ (1890 _sqq._), and _home university
library,_ though the volumes in such series are of very unequal merit.
convenient chronological summaries are: g. p. and g. h. putnam,
_tabular views of universal history_ (1914); carl ploetz, _manual of
universal history_, trans. and enlarged by w. h. tillinghast, new
edition (1915); _haydn's dictionary of dates_, 25th ed. (1911); c. e.
little, _cyclopaedia of classified dates_ (1900); _cambridge modern
history_, vol. xiii (1911). the best atlas--a vitally necessary adjunct
of historical study--is either that of w. r. shepherd, _historical
atlas_ (1911), or that of ramsay muir, _hammond's new historical atlas
for students_, 2d ed. (1915); a smaller historical atlas is that of e.
w. dow (1907), and longer ones are _cambridge modern history_, vol. xiv
(1912) and, in german, putzger, _historischer schulatlas_. elaborate
treatises on historical geography: elisee reclus, _the universal
geography_, trans. and ed. by e. g. ravenstein, 19 vols.; _nouveau
dictionnaire de geographie universelle_, by vivien de saint-martin and
louis rousselet, 10 vols. see also h. b. george, _the relations of
geography and history_ (1910) and ellen c. semple, _the influence of
geographic environment_ (1911).

standard secondary works and sets on modern history. _the cambridge
modern history_, 12 vols. and 2 supplementary vols. (1902-1912),
planned by lord acton, edited by a. w. ward, g. w. prothero, and
stanley leathes, written by english scholars, covering the period from
1450 to 1910, generally sound but rather narrowly political. better
balanced is the monumental work of a group of french scholars,
_histoire generale du ive siecle a nos jours_, edited by ernest lavisse
and alfred rambaud, 12 vols. (1894-1901), of which the last nine treat
of the years from 1492 to 1900. for social history a series, _histoire
universelle du travail_, 12 vols., is projected under the editorship of
georges renard. _the encyclopaedia britannica_, 11th ed. (1910-1911), is
the work mainly of distinguished scholars and a storehouse of
historical information, political, social, and intellectual. also
available in english is _history of all nations_, 24 vols. (1902), the
first nineteen based on translation of theodor flathe, _allgemeine
weltgeschichte_,--vols. x-xxiv dealing with modern history,--vol. xx,
on europe, asia, and africa since 1871, by c. m. andrews, and vols.
xxi-xxiii, on american history, by john fiske; likewise h. f. helmolt
(editor), _weltgeschichte_, trans. into english, 8 vols. (1902-1907).
sets and series in german: wilhelm oncken (editor), _allgemeine
geschichte in einzeldarstellungen_, 50 vols. (1879-1893); _geschichte
der europaeischen staaten_, an enormous collection, appearing more or
less constantly from 1829 to the present and edited successively by
such famous scholars as a. h. l. heeren, f. a. ukert, wilhelm von
giesebrecht, and karl lamprecht; g. von below and f. meinecke
(editors), _handbuch der mittel-alterlichen und neueren geschichte_, a
series begun in 1903 and planned, when completed, to comprise 40 vols.;
paul hinneberg (editor), _die kultur der gegenwart, ihre entwicklung
und ihre ziele_, a remarkable series begun in 1906 and intended to
explain in many volumes the civilization of the twentieth century in
all its aspects; erich brandenburg (editor), _bibliothek der
geschichtswissenschaft_, a series recently projected, the first volume
appearing in 1912; j. von pflugk-harttung, _weltgeschichte: die
entwicklung der menschheit in staat und gesellschaft, in kultur und
geistesleben_, 6 vols. illust. (1908-1911); theodor lindner,
_weltgeschichte seit der voelkerwanderung_, 8 vols. (1908-1914).
valuable contributions to general modern history occur in such
monumental national histories as karl lamprecht, _deutsche geschichte_,
12 vols. in 16 (1891-1909), and, more particularly, ernest lavisse
(editor), _histoire de france depuis les origines jusqu'a la
revolution_, 9 double vols. (1900-1911).

biographical dictionaries. general: _encyclopedia britannica_, 11th
ed., 29 vols. (1910-1911); _new international encyclopedia_, 2d ed., 24
vols. (1914-1916); _catholic encyclopedia_, 15 vols. (1907-1912). great
britain: leslie stephen and sidney lee (editors), _dictionary of
national biography_, 72 vols. (1885-1913). france: hoefer (editor),
_nouvelle biographie generale_, 46 vols. (1855-1866); _dictionnaire de
biographie francaise_, projected (1913) under editorship of louis
didier, albert isnard, and gabriel ledos. germany: liliencron and
wegele (editors), _allgemeine deutsche biographie_, 54 vols. (1875
_sqq_.). austria-hungary: wurzbach (editor), _biographisches lexikon
des kaiserthums oesterreich_, 60 vols. (1856-1891). there is also a
well-known french work--l. g. michaud, _biographie universelle ancienne
et moderne_, 45 vols. (1880).
