


this ebook was produced by dagny, dagnypg@yahoo.com
and david widger, widger@cecomet.net





book vi.



chapter i.

sir peter had not heard from kenelm since a letter informing him that
his son had left town on an excursion, which would probably be short,
though it might last a few weeks; and the good baronet now resolved to
go to london himself, take his chance of kenelm's return, and if still
absent, at least learn from mivers and others how far that very
eccentric planet had contrived to steer a regular course amidst the
fixed stars of the metropolitan system.  he had other reasons for his
journey.  he wished to make the acquaintance of chillingly gordon
before handing him over the l20,000 which kenelm had released in that
resettlement of estates, the necessary deeds of which the young heir
had signed before quitting london for moleswich.  sir peter wished
still more to see cecilia travers, in whom kenelm's accounts of her
had inspired a very strong interest.

the day after his arrival in town sir peter breakfasted with mivers.

"upon my word you are very comfortable here," said sir peter, glancing
at the well-appointed table, and round the well-furnished rooms.

"naturally so: there is no one to prevent my being comfortable.  i am
not married; taste that omelette."

"some men declare they never knew comfort till they were married,
cousin miners."

"some men are reflecting bodies, and catch a pallid gleam from the
comfort which a wife concentres on herself.  with a fortune so modest
and secure, what comforts, possessed by me now, would not a mrs.
chillingly mivers ravish from my hold and appropriate to herself!
instead of these pleasant rooms, where should i be lodged?  in a dingy
den looking on a backyard excluded from the sun by day and vocal with
cats by night; while mrs. mivers luxuriated in two drawing-rooms with
southern aspect and perhaps a boudoir.  my brougham would be torn from
my uses and monopolized by 'the angel of my hearth,' clouded in her
crinoline and halved by her chignon.  no! if ever i marry--and i never
deprive myself of the civilities and needlework which single ladies
waste upon me by saying i shall not marry--it will be when women have
fully established their rights; for then men may have a chance of
vindicating their own.  then if there are two drawing-rooms in the
house i shall take one; if not, we will toss up who shall have the
back parlour; if we keep a brougham, it will be exclusively mine three
days in the week; if mrs. m. wants l200 a year for her wardrobe she
must be contented with one, the other half will belong to my personal
decoration; if i am oppressed by proof-sheets and printers' devils,
half of the oppression falls to her lot, while i take my holiday on
the croquet ground at wimbledon.  yes, when the present wrongs of
women are exchanged for equality with men, i will cheerfully marry;
and to do the thing generous, i will not oppose mrs. m.'s voting in
the vestry or for parliament.  i will give her my own votes with
pleasure."

"i fear, my dear cousin, that you have infected kenelm with your
selfish ideas on the nuptial state.  he does not seem inclined to
marry,--eh?"

"not that i know of."

"what sort of girl is cecilia travers?"

"one of those superior girls who are not likely to tower into that
terrible giantess called a 'superior woman.' a handsome,
well-educated, sensible young lady, not spoiled by being an heiress;
in fine, just the sort of girl whom you could desire to fix on for a
daughter-in-law."

"and you don't think kenelm has a fancy for her?"

"honestly speaking, i do not."

"any counter-attraction?  there are some things in which sons do not
confide in their fathers.  you have never heard that kenelm has been a
little wild?"

"wild he is, as the noble savage who ran in the woods," said cousin
mivers.

"you frighten me!"

"before the noble savage ran across the squaws, and was wise enough to
run away from them.  kenelm has run away now somewhere."

"yes, he does not tell me where, nor do they know at his lodgings.  a
heap of notes on his table and no directions where they are to be
forwarded.  on the whole, however, he has held his own in london
society,--eh?"

"certainly! he has been more courted than most young men, and perhaps
more talked of.  oddities generally are."

"you own he has talents above the average?  do you not think he will
make a figure in the world some day, and discharge that debt to the
literary stores or the political interests of his country, which alas,
i and my predecessors, the other sir peters, failed to do; and for
which i hailed his birth, and gave him the name of kenelm?"

"upon my word," answered mivers,--who had now finished his breakfast,
retreated to an easy-chair, and taken from the chimney-piece one of
his famous trabucos,--"upon my word, i can't guess; if some great
reverse of fortune befell him, and he had to work for his livelihood,
or if some other direful calamity gave a shock to his nervous system
and jolted it into a fussy, fidgety direction, i dare say he might
make a splash in that current of life which bears men on to the grave.
but you see he wants, as he himself very truly says, the two
stimulants to definite action,--poverty and vanity."

"surely there have been great men who were neither poor nor vain?"

"i doubt it.  but vanity is a ruling motive that takes many forms and
many aliases: call it ambition, call it love of fame, still its
substance is the same,--the desire of applause carried into fussiness
of action."

"there may be the desire for abstract truth without care for
applause."

"certainly.  a philosopher on a desert island may amuse himself by
meditating on the distinction between light and heat.  but if, on
returning to the world, he publish the result of his meditations,
vanity steps in and desires to be applauded."

"nonsense, cousin mivers, he may rather desire to be of use and
benefit to mankind.  you don't deny that there is such a thing as
philanthropy."

"i don't deny that there is such a thing as humbug.  and whenever i
meet a man who has the face to tell me that he is taking a great deal
of trouble, and putting himself very much out of his way, for a
philanthropical object, without the slightest idea of reward either in
praise or pence, i know that i have a humbug before me,--a dangerous
humbug, a swindling humbug, a fellow with his pocket full of villanous
prospectuses and appeals to subscribers."

"pooh, pooh; leave off that affectation of cynicism: you are not a
bad-hearted fellow; you must love mankind; you must have an interest
in the welfare of posterity."

"love mankind?  interest in posterity?  bless my soul, cousin peter, i
hope you have no prospectuses in /your/ pockets; no schemes for
draining the pontine marshes out of pure love to mankind; no
propositions for doubling the income-tax, as a reserve fund for
posterity, should our coal-fields fail three thousand years hence.
love of mankind!  rubbish!  this comes of living in the country."

"but you do love the human race; you do care for the generations that
are to come."

"i!  not a bit of it.  on the contrary, i rather dislike the human
race, taking it altogether, and including the australian bushmen; and
i don't believe any man who tells me that he would grieve half as much
if ten millions of human beings were swallowed up by an earthquake at
a considerable distance from his own residence, say abyssinia, as he
would for a rise in his butcher's bills.  as to posterity, who would
consent to have a month's fit of the gout or tic-douloureux in order
that in the fourth thousand year, a. d., posterity should enjoy a
perfect system of sewage?"

sir peter, who had recently been afflicted by a very sharp attack of
neuralgia, shook his head, but was too conscientious not to keep
silence.

"to turn the subject," said mivers, relighting the cigar which he had
laid aside while delivering himself of his amiable opinions, "i think
you would do well, while in town, to call on your old friend travers,
and be introduced to cecilia.  if you think as favourably of her as i
do, why not ask father and daughter to pay you a visit at exmundham?
girls think more about a man when they see the place which he can
offer to them as a home, and exmundham is an attractive place to
girls,--picturesque and romantic."

"a very good idea," cried sir peter, heartily.  and i want also to
make the acquaintance of chillingly gordon.  give me his address."

"here is his card on the chimney-piece, take it; you will always find
him at home till two o'clock.  he is too sensible to waste the
forenoon in riding out in hyde park with young ladies."

"give me your frank opinion of that young kinsman.  kenelm tells me
that he is clever and ambitious."

"kenelm speaks truly.  he is not a man who will talk stuff about love
of mankind and posterity.  he is of our day, with large, keen,
wide-awake eyes, that look only on such portions of mankind as can be
of use to him, and do not spoil their sight by poring through cracked
telescopes to catch a glimpse of posterity.  gordon is a man to be a
chancellor of the exchequer, perhaps a prime minister."

"and old gordon's son is cleverer than my boy,--than the namesake of
kenelm digby!" and sir peter sighed.

"i did not say that.  i am cleverer than chillingly gordon, and the
proof of it is that i am too clever to wish to be prime
minister,--very disagreeable office, hard work, irregular hours for
meals, much abuse and confirmed dyspepsia."

sir peter went away rather down-hearted.  he found chillingly gordon
at home in a lodging in jermyn street.  though prepossessed against
him by all he had heard, sir peter was soon propitiated in his favour.
gordon had a frank man-of-the-world way with him, and much too fine a
tact to utter any sentiments likely to displease an old-fashioned
country gentleman, and a relation who might possibly be of service in
his career. he touched briefly, and with apparent feeling, on the
unhappy litigation commenced by his father; spoke with affectionate
praise of kenelm; and with a discriminating good-nature of mivers, as
a man who, to parody the epigram on charles ii.,


     "never says a kindly thing
      and never does a harsh one."


then he drew sir peter on to talk of the country and agricultural
prospects.  learned that among his objects in visiting town was the
wish to inspect a patented hydraulic ram that might be very useful for
his farm-yard, which was ill supplied with water.  startled the
baronet by evincing some practical knowledge of mechanics; insisted on
accompanying him to the city to inspect the ram; did so, and approved
the purchase; took him next to see a new american reaping-machine, and
did not part with him till he had obtained sir peter's promise to dine
with him at the garrick; an invitation peculiarly agreeable to sir
peter, who had a natural curiosity to see some of the more recently
distinguished frequenters of that social club.  as, on quitting
gordon, sir peter took his way to the house of leopold travers, his
thoughts turned with much kindliness towards his young kinsman.
"mivers and kenelm," quoth he to himself, "gave me an unfavourable
impression of this lad; they represent him as worldly, self-seeking,
and so forth.  but mivers takes such cynical views of character, and
kenelm is too eccentric to judge fairly of a sensible man of the
world.  at all events, it is not like an egotist to put himself out of
his way to be so civil to an old fellow like me.  a young man about
town must have pleasanter modes of passing his day than inspecting
hydraulic rams and reaping-machines.  clever they allow him to be.
yes, decidedly clever, and not offensively clever,--practical."

sir peter found travers in the dining-room with his daughter, mrs.
campion, and lady glenalvon.  travers was one of those men rare in
middle age, who are more often to be found in their drawing-room than
in their private study; he was fond of female society; and perhaps it
was this predilection which contributed to preserve in him the charm
of good breeding and winning manners.  the two men had not met for
many years; not indeed since travers was at the zenith of his career
of fashion, and sir peter was one of those pleasant /dilettanti/ and
half humoristic conversationalists who become popular and courted
diners-out.

sir peter had originally been a moderate whig because his father had
been one before him; but he left the whig party with the duke of
richmond, mr. stanley (afterwards lord derby), and others, when it
seemed to him that that party had ceased to be moderate.

leopold travers had, as a youth in the guards, been a high tory, but,
siding with sir robert peel on the repeal of the corn laws, remained
with the peelites after the bulk of the tory party had renounced the
guidance of their former chief, and now went with these peelites in
whatever direction the progress of the age might impel their strides
in advance of whigs and in defiance of tories.

however, it is not the politics of these two gentlemen that are in
question now.  as i have just said, they had not met for many years.
travers was very little changed.  sir peter recognized him at a
glance; sir peter was much changed, and travers hesitated before, on
hearing his name announced, he felt quite sure that it was the right
sir peter towards whom he advanced, and to whom he extended his
cordial hand.  travers preserved the colour of his hair and the neat
proportions of his figure, and was as scrupulously well dressed as in
his dandy days.  sir peter, originally very thin and with fair locks
and dreamy blue eyes, had now become rather portly,--at least towards
the middle of him,--and very gray; had long ago taken to spectacles;
his dress, too, was very old-fashioned, and made by a country tailor.
he looked quite as much a gentleman as travers did; quite perhaps as
healthy, allowing for difference of years; quite as likely to last his
time.  but between them there was the difference of the nervous
temperament and the lymphatic.  travers, with less brain than sir
peter, had kept his brain constantly active; sir peter had allowed his
brain to dawdle over old books and lazily delight in letting the hours
slip by.  therefore travers still looked young, alert,--up to his day,
up to anything; while sir peter, entering that drawing-room, seemed a
sort of rip van winkle who had slept through the past generation, and
looked on the present with eyes yet drowsy.  still, in those rare
moments when he was thoroughly roused up, there would have been found
in sir peter a glow of heart, nay, even a vigour of thought, much more
expressive than the constitutional alertness that characterized
leopold travers, of the attributes we most love and admire in the
young.

"my dear sir peter, is it you?  i am so glad to see you again," said
travers.  "what an age since we met, and how condescendingly kind you
were then to me; silly fop that i was!  but bygones are bygones; come
to the present.  let me introduce to you, first, my valued friend,
mrs. campion, whose distinguished husband you remember.  ah, what
pleasant meetings we had at his house!  and next, that young lady of
whom she takes motherly charge, my daughter cecilia.  lady glenalvon,
your wife's friend, of course needs no introduction: time stands still
with her."

sir peter lowered his spectacles, which in reality he only wanted for
books in small print, and gazed attentively on the three ladies,--at
each gaze a bow.  but while his eyes were still lingeringly fixed on
cecilia, lady glenalvon advanced, naturally in right of rank and the
claim of old acquaintance, the first of the three to greet him.

"alas, my dear sir peter!  time does not stand still for any of us;
but what matter, if it leaves pleasant footprints?  when i see you
again, my youth comes before me,--my early friend, caroline
brotherton, now lady chillingly; our girlish walks with each other;
wreaths and ball-dresses the practical topic; prospective husbands,
the dream at a distance.  come and sit here: tell me all about
caroline."

sir peter, who had little to say about caroline that could possibly
interest anybody but himself, nevertheless took his seat beside lady
glenalvon, and, as in duty bound, made the most flattering account of
his she baronet which experience or invention would allow.  all the
while, however, his thoughts were on kenelm, and his eyes on cecilia.

cecilia resumes some mysterious piece of lady's work, no matter
what,--perhaps embroidery for a music-stool, perhaps a pair of
slippers for her father (which, being rather vain of his feet and
knowing they looked best in plain morocco, he will certainly never
wear).  cecilia appears absorbed in her occupation; but her eyes and
her thoughts are on sir peter.  why, my lady reader may guess.  and
oh, so flatteringly, so lovingly fixed!  she thinks he has a most
charming, intelligent, benignant countenance.  she admires even his
old-fashioned frock-coat, high neckcloth, and strapped trousers.  she
venerates his gray hairs, pure of dye.  she tries to find a close
resemblance between that fair, blue-eyed, plumpish, elderly gentleman
and the lean, dark-eyed, saturnine, lofty kenelm; she detects the
likeness which nobody else would.  she begins to love sir peter,
though he has not said a word to her.

ah! on this, a word for what it is worth to you, my young readers.
you, sir, wishing to marry a girl who is to be deeply, lastingly in
love with you, and a thoroughly good wife practically, consider well
how she takes to your parents; how she attaches to them an
inexpressible sentiment, a disinterested reverence; even should you
but dimly recognize the sentiment, or feel the reverence, how if
between you and your parents some little cause of coldness arise, she
will charm you back to honour your father and your mother, even though
they are not particularly genial to her: well, if you win that sort of
girl as your wife think you have got a treasure.  you have won a woman
to whom heaven has given the two best attributes,--intense feeling of
love, intense sense of duty.  what, my dear lady reader, i say of one
sex, i say of another, though in a less degree; because a girl who
marries becomes of her husband's family, and the man does not become
of his wife's.  still i distrust the depth of any man's love to a
woman, if he does not feel a great degree of tenderness (and
forbearance where differences arise) for her parents.  but the wife
must not so put them in the foreground as to make the husband think he
is cast in the cold of the shadow.  pardon this intolerable length of
digression, dear reader: it is not altogether a digression, for it
belongs to my tale that you should clearly understand the sort of girl
that is personified in cecilia travers.

"what has become of kenelm?" asked lady glenalvon.

"i wish i could tell you," answered sir peter.  "he wrote me word that
he was going forth on rambles into 'fresh woods and pastures new,'
perhaps for some weeks.  i have not had a word from him since."

"you make me uneasy," said lady glenalvon.  "i hope nothing can have
happened to him: he cannot have fallen ill."

cecilia stops her work, and looks up wistfully.

"make your mind easy," said travers with a laugh; "i am in this
secret.  he has challenged the champion of england, and gone into the
country to train."

"very likely," said sir peter, quietly: "i should not be in the least
surprised; should you, miss travers?"

"i think it more probable that mr. chillingly is doing some kindness
to others which he wishes to keep concealed."

sir peter was pleased with this reply, and drew his chair nearer to
cecilia's.  lady glenalvon, charmed to bring those two together, soon
rose and took leave.

sir peter remained nearly an hour talking chiefly with cecilia, who
won her way into his heart with extraordinary ease; and he did not
quit the house till he had engaged her father, mrs. campion, and
herself to pay him a week's visit at exmundham, towards the end of the
london season, which was fast approaching.

having obtained this promise, sir peter went away, and ten minutes
after mr. chillingly gordon entered the drawing-room.  he had already
established a visiting acquaintance with the traverses.  travers had
taken a liking to him.  mrs. campion found him an extremely
well-informed, unaffected young man, very superior to young men in
general.  cecilia was cordially polite to kenelm's cousin.  altogether
that was a very happy day for sir peter.  he enjoyed greatly his
dinner at the garrick, where he met some old acquaintance and was
presented to some new "celebrities."  he observed that gordon stood
well with these eminent persons.  though as yet undistinguished
himself, they treated him with a certain respect, as well as with
evident liking.  the most eminent of them, at least the one with the
most solidly established reputation, said in sir peter's ear, "you may
be proud of your nephew gordon!"

"he is not my nephew, only the son of a very distant cousin."

"sorry for that.  but he will shed lustre on kinsfolk, however
distant.  clever fellow, yet popular; rare combination,--sure to
rise."

sir peter suppressed a gulp in the throat.  "ah, if some one as
eminent had spoken thus of kenelm!"

but he was too generous to allow that half-envious sentiment to last
more than a moment.  why should he not be proud of any member of the
family who could irradiate the antique obscurity of the chillingly
race?  and how agreeable this clever young man made himself to sir
peter!

the next day gordon insisted on accompanying him to see the latest
acquisitions in the british museum, and various other exhibitions, and
went at night to the prince of wales's theatre, where sir peter was
infinitely delighted with an admirable little comedy by mr. robertson,
admirably placed on the stage by marie wilton.  the day after, when
gordon called on him at his hotel, he cleared his throat, and thus
plunged at once into the communication he had hitherto delayed.

"gordon, my boy, i owe you a debt, and i am now, thanks to kenelm,
able to pay it."

gordon gave a little start of surprise, but remained silent.

"i told your father, shortly after kenelm was born, that i meant to
give up my london house, and lay by l1000 a year for you, in
compensation for your chance of succeeding to exmundham should i have
died childless.  well, your father did not seem to think much of that
promise, and went to law with me about certain unquestionable rights
of mine.  how so clever a man could have made such a mistake would
puzzle me, if i did not remember that he had a quarrelsome temper.
temper is a thing that often dominates cleverness,--an uncontrollable
thing; and allowances must be made for it.  not being of a quarrelsome
temper myself (the chillinglys are a placid race), i did not make the
allowance for your father's differing, and (for a chillingly)
abnormal, constitution.  the language and the tone of his letter
respecting it nettled me.  i did not see why, thus treated, i should
pinch myself to lay by a thousand a year.  facilities for buying a
property most desirable for the possessor of exmundham presented
themselves.  i bought it with borrowed money, and though i gave up the
house in london, i did not lay by the thousand a year."

"my dear sir peter, i have always regretted that my poor father was
misled--perhaps out of too paternal a care for my supposed
interests--into that unhappy and fruitless litigation, after which no
one could doubt that any generous intentions on your part would be
finally abandoned.  it has been a grateful surprise to me that i have
been so kindly and cordially received into the family by kenelm and
yourself.  pray oblige me by dropping all reference to pecuniary
matters: the idea of compensation to a very distant relative for the
loss of expectations he had no right to form, is too absurd, for me at
least, ever to entertain."

"but i am absurd enough to entertain it, though you express yourself
in a very high-minded way.  to come to the point, kenelm is of age,
and we have cut off the entail.  the estate of course remains
absolutely with kenelm to dispose of, as it did before, and we must
take it for granted that he will marry; at all events he cannot fall
into your poor father's error: but whatever kenelm hereafter does with
his property, it is nothing to you, and is not to be counted upon.
even the title dies with kenelm if he has no son.  on resettling the
estate, however, sums of money have been realized which, as i stated
before, enable me to discharge the debt which kenelm heartily agrees
with me is due to you.  l20,000 are now lying at my bankers' to be
transferred to yours; meanwhile, if you will call on my solicitor, mr.
vining, lincoln's-inn, you can see the new deed and give to him your
receipt for the l20,000, for which he holds my cheque.  stop! stop!
stop!  i will not hear a.  word: no thanks; they are not due."

here gordon, who had during this speech uttered various brief
exclamations, which sir peter did not heed, caught hold of his
kinsman's hand, and, despite of all struggles, pressed his lips on it.
"i must thank you; i must give some vent to my emotions," cried
gordon.  "this sum, great in itself, is far more to me than you can
imagine: it opens my career; it assures my future."

"so kenelm tells me; he said that sum would be more use to you now
than ten times the amount twenty years hence."

"so it will,--it will.  and kenelm consents to this sacrifice?"

"consents! urges it."

gordon turned away his face, and sir peter resumed: "you want to get
into parliament; very natural ambition for a clever young fellow.  i
don't presume to dictate politics to you.  i hear you are what is
called a liberal; a man may be a liberal, i suppose, without being a
jacobin."

"i hope so, indeed.  for my part i am anything but a violent man."

"violent, no!  who ever heard of a violent chillingly?  but i was
reading in the newspaper to-day a speech addressed to some popular
audience, in which the orator was for dividing all the lands and all
the capital belonging to other people among the working class, calmly
and quietly, without any violence, and deprecating violence: but
saying, perhaps very truly, that the people to be robbed might not
like it, and might offer violence; in which case woe betide them; it
was they who would be guilty of violence; and they must take the
consequences if they resisted the reasonable, propositions of himself
and his friends!  that, i suppose, is among the new ideas with which
kenelm is more familiar than i am.  do you entertain those new ideas?"

"certainly not: i despise the fools who do."

"and you will not abet revolutionary measures if you get into
parliament?"

"my dear sir peter, i fear you have heard very false reports of my
opinions if you put such questions.  listen," and therewith gordon
launched into dissertations very clever, very subtle, which committed
him to nothing, beyond the wisdom of guiding popular opinions into
right directions: what might be right directions he did not define; he
left sir peter to guess them.  sir peter did guess them, as gordon
meant he should, to be the directions which he, sir peter, thought
right; and he was satisfied.

that subject disposed of, gordon said, with much apparent feeling,
"may i ask you to complete the favours you have lavished on me?  i
have never seen exmundham, and the home of the race from which i
sprang has a deep interest for time.  will you allow me to spend a few
days with you, and under the shade of your own trees take lessons in
political science from one who has evidently reflected on it
profoundly?"

"profoundly, no; a little,--a little, as a mere bystander," said sir
peter, modestly, but much flattered.  "come, my dear boy, by all
means; you will have a hearty welcome.  by the by, travers and his
handsome daughter promised to visit me in about a fortnight, why not
come at the same time?"

a sudden flash lit up the young man's countenance.

"i shall be so delighted," he cried.  "i am but slightly acquainted
with mr. travers, but i like him much, and mrs. campion is so well
informed."

"and what say you to the girl?"

"the girl, miss travers.  oh, she is very well in her way.  but i
don't talk with young ladies more than i can help."

"then you are like your cousin kenelm?"

"i wish i were like him in other things."

"no, one such oddity in a family is quite enough.  but though i would
not have you change to a kenelm, i would not change kenelm for the
most perfect model of a son that the world can exhibit."  delivering
himself of this burst of parental fondness, sir peter shook hands with
gordon, and walked off to mivers, who was to give him luncheon and
then accompany him to the station.  sir peter was to return to
exmundham by the afternoon express.

left alone, gordon indulged in one of those luxurious guesses into the
future which form the happiest moments in youth when so ambitious as
his.  the sum sir peter placed at his disposal would insure his
entrance in parliament.  he counted with confidence on early successes
there.  he extended the scope of his views.  with such successes he
might calculate with certainty on a brilliant marriage, augmenting his
fortune, and confirming his position.  he had previously fixed his
thoughts on cecilia travers.  i will do him the justice to say not
from mercenary motives alone, but not certainly with the impetuous
ardour of youthful love.  he thought her exactly fitted to be the wife
of an eminent public man, in person, acquirement, dignified yet
popular manners.  he esteemed her, he liked her, and then her fortune
would add solidity to his position.  in fact, he had that sort of
rational attachment to cecilia which wise men, like lord bacon and
montaigne, would commend to another wise man seeking a wife.  what
opportunities of awaking in herself a similar, perhaps a warmer,
attachment the visit to exmundham would afford!  he had learned when
he had called on the traverses that they were going thither, and hence
that burst of family sentiment which had procured the invitation to
himself.

but he must be cautious, he must not prematurely awaken travers's
suspicions.  he was not as yet a match that the squire could approve
of for his heiress.  and, though he was ignorant of sir peter's
designs on that, young lady, he was much too prudent to confide his
own to a kinsman of whose discretion he had strong misgivings.  it was
enough for him at present that way was opened for his own resolute
energies.  and cheerfully, though musingly, he weighed its obstacles,
and divined its goal, as he paced his floor with bended head and
restless strides, now quick, now slow.

sir peter, in the meanwhile, found a very good luncheon prepared for
him at mivers's rooms, which he had all to himself, for his host never
"spoilt his dinner and insulted his breakfast" by that intermediate
meal.  he remained at his desk writing brief notes of business, or of
pleasure, while sir peter did justice to lamb cutlets and grilled
chicken.  but he looked up from his task, with raised eyebrows, when
sir peter, after a somewhat discursive account of his visit to the
traverses, his admiration of cecilia, and the adroitness with which,
acting on his cousin's hint, he had engaged the family to spend a few
days at exmundham, added, "and, by the by, i have asked young gordon
to meet them."

"to meet them! meet mr. and miss travers! you have?  i thought you
wished kenelm to marry cecilia.  i was mistaken, you meant gordon!"

"gordon," exclaimed sir peter, dropping his knife and fork.
"nonsense, you don't suppose that miss travers prefers him to kenelm,
or that he has the presumption to fancy that her father would sanction
his addresses?"

"i indulge in no suppositions of the sort.  i content myself with
thinking that gordon is clever, insinuating, young; and it is a very
good chance of bettering himself that you have thrown in his way.
however, it is no affair of mine; and though on the whole i like
kenelm better than gordon, still i like gordon very well, and i have
an interest in following his career which i can't say i have in
conjecturing what may be kenelm's--more likely no career at all."

"mivers, you delight in provoking me; you do say such uncomfortable
things.  but, in the first place, gordon spoke rather slightingly of
miss travers."

"ah, indeed; that's a bad sign," muttered mivers.

sir peter did not hear him, and went on.

"and, besides, i feel pretty sure that the dear girl has already a
regard for kenelm which allows no room for a rival. however, i shall
not forget your hint, but keep a sharp lookout; and, if i see the
young man wants to be too sweet on cecilia, i shall cut short his
visit."

"give yourself no trouble in the matter; it will do no good.
marriages are made in heaven.  heaven's will be done.  if i can get
away i will run down to you for a day or two.  perhaps in that case
you can ask lady glenalvon.  i like her, and she likes kenelm.  have
you finished?  i see the brougham is at the door, and we have to call
at your hotel to take up your carpet-bag."

mivers was deliberately sealing his notes while he thus spoke.  he now
rang for his servant, gave orders for their delivery, and then
followed sir peter down stairs and into the brougham.  not a word
would he say more about gordon, and sir peter shrank from telling him
about the l20,000.  chillingly mivers was perhaps the last person to
whom sir peter would be tempted to parade an act of generosity.
mivers might not unfrequently do a generous act himself, provided it
was not divulged; but he had always a sneer for the generosity of
others.



chapter ii.

wandering back towards moleswich, kenelm found himself a little before
sunset on the banks of the garrulous brook, almost opposite to the
house inhabited by lily mordaunt.  he stood long and silently by the
grassy margin, his dark shadow falling over the stream, broken into
fragments by the eddy and strife of waves, fresh from their leap down
the neighbouring waterfall.  his eyes rested on the house and the
garden lawn in the front.  the upper windows were open.  "i wonder
which is hers," he said to himself.  at last he caught a glimpse of
the gardener, bending over a flower border with his watering-pot, and
then moving slowly through the little shrubbery, no doubt to his own
cottage.  now the lawn was solitary, save that a couple of thrushes
dropped suddenly on the sward.

"good evening, sir," said a voice.  "a capital spot for trout this."

kenelm turned his head, and beheld on the footpath, just behind him, a
respectable elderly man, apparently of the class of a small retail
tradesman, with a fishing-rod in his hand and a basket belted to his
side.

"for trout," replied kenelm; "i dare say.  a strangely attractive spot
indeed."

"are you an angler, sir, if i may make bold to inquire?" asked the
elderly man, somewhat perhaps puzzled as to the rank of the stranger;
noticing, on the one hand, his dress and his mien, on the other, slung
to his shoulders, the worn and shabby knapsack which kenelm had
carried, at home and abroad, the preceding year.

"ay, i am an angler."

"then this is the best place in the whole stream.  look, sir, there is
izaak walton's summer-house; and further down you see that white,
neat-looking house.  well, that is my house, sir, and i have an
apartment which i let to gentleman anglers.  it is generally occupied
throughout the summer months.  i expect every day to have a letter to
engage it, but it is vacant now.  a very nice apartment,
sir,--sitting-room and bedroom."

"/descende ceolo, et dic age tibia/," said kenelm.

"sir?" said the elderly man.

"i beg you ten thousand pardons.  i have had the misfortune to have
been at the university, and to have learned a little latin, which
sometimes comes back very inopportunely.  but, speaking in plain
english, what i meant to say is this: i invoked the muse to descend
from heaven and bring with her--the original says a fife, but i
meant--a fishing-rod.  i should think your apartment would suit me
exactly; pray show it to me."

"with the greatest pleasure," said the elderly man.  "the muse need
not bring a fishing-rod! we have all sorts of tackle at your service,
and a boat too, if you care for that.  the stream hereabouts is so
shallow and narrow that a boat is of little use till you get farther
down."

"i don't want to get farther down; but should i want to get to the
opposite bank, without wading across, would the boat take me or is
there a bridge?"

"the boat can take you.  it is a flat-bottomed punt, and there is a
bridge too for foot-passengers, just opposite my house; and between
this and moleswich, where the stream widens, there is a ferry.  the
stone bridge for traffic is at the farther end of the town."

"good.  let us go at once to your house."

the two men walked on.

"by the by," said kenelm, as they walked, "do you know much of the
family that inhabit the pretty cottage on the opposite side, which we
have just left behind?"

"mrs. cameron's.  yes, of course, a very good lady; and mr. melville,
the painter.  i am sure i ought to know, for he has often lodged with
me when he came to visit mrs. cameron.  he recommends my apartment to
his friends, and they are my best lodgers.  i like painters, sir,
though i don't know much about paintings.  they are pleasant
gentlemen, and easily contented with my humble roof and fare."

"you are quite right.  i don't know much about paintings myself; but i
am inclined to believe that painters, judging not from what i have
seen of them, for i have not a single acquaintance among them
personally, but from what i have read of their lives, are, as a
general rule, not only pleasant but noble gentlemen.  they form within
themselves desires to beautify or exalt commonplace things, and they
can only accomplish their desires by a constant study of what is
beautiful and what is exalted.  a man constantly so engaged ought to
be a very noble gentleman, even though he may be the son of a
shoeblack.  and living in a higher world than we do, i can conceive
that he is, as you say, very well contented with humble roof and fare
in the world we inhabit."

"exactly, sir; i see--i see now, though you put it in a way that never
struck me before."

"and yet," said kenelm, looking benignly at the speaker, "you seem to
me a well-educated and intelligent man; reflective on things in
general, without being unmindful of your interests in particular,
especially when you have lodgings to let.  do not be offended.  that
sort of man is not perhaps born to be a painter, but i respect him
highly.  the world, sir, requires the vast majority of its inhabitants
to live in it,--to live by it.  'each for himself, and god for us
all.'  the greatest happiness of the greatest number is best secured
by a prudent consideration for number one."

somewhat to kenelm's surprise (allowing that he had now learned enough
of life to be occasionally surprised) the elderly man here made a dead
halt, stretched out his hand cordially, and cried, "hear, hear!  i see
that, like me, you are a decided democrat."

"democrat!  pray, may i ask, not why you are one,--that would be a
liberty, and democrats resent any liberty taken with themselves; but
why you suppose i am?"

"you spoke of the greatest happiness of the greatest number.  that is
a democratic sentiment surely!  besides, did not you say, sir, that
painters,--painters, sir, painters, even if they were the sons of
shoeblacks, were the true gentlemen,--the true noblemen?"

"i did not say that exactly, to the disparagement of other gentlemen
and nobles.  but if i did, what then?"

"sir, i agree with you.  i despise rank; i despise dukes and earls and
aristocrats.  'an honest man's the noblest work of god.'  some poet
says that.  i think shakspeare. wonderful man, shakspeare.  a
tradesman's son,--butcher, i believe.  eh!  my uncle was a butcher,
and might have been an alderman.  i go along with you heartily,
heartily. i am a democrat, every inch of me.  shake hands, sir, shake
hands; we are all equals.  'each man for himself, and god for us
all.'"

"i have no objection to shake hands," said kenelm; "but don't let me
owe your condescension to false pretences.  though we are all equal
before the law, except the rich man, who has little chance of justice
as against a poor man when submitted to an english jury, yet i utterly
deny that any two men you select can be equals.  one must beat the
other in something; and, when one man beats another, democracy ceases
and aristocracy begins."

"aristocracy!  i don't see that.  what do you mean by aristocracy?"

"the ascendency of the better man.  in a rude state the better man is
the stronger; in a corrupt state, perhaps the more roguish; in modern
republics the jobbers get the money and the lawyers get the power.  in
well-ordered states alone aristocracy appears at its genuine worth:
the better man in birth, because respect for ancestry secures a higher
standard of honour; the better man in wealth, because of the immense
uses to enterprise, energy, and the fine arts, which rich men must be
if they follow their natural inclinations; the better man in
character, the better man in ability, for reasons too obvious to
define; and these two last will beat the others in the government of
the state, if the state be flourishing and free.  all these four
classes of better men constitute true aristocracy; and when a better
government than a true aristocracy shall be devised by the wit of man,
we shall not be far off from the millennium and the reign of saints.
but here we are at the house,--yours, is it not?  i like the look of
it extremely."

the elderly man now entered the little porch, over which clambered
honeysuckle and ivy intertwined, and ushered kenelm into a pleasant
parlour, with a bay window, and an equally pleasant bedroom behind it.

"will it do, sir?"

"perfectly.  i take it from this moment.  my knapsack contains all i
shall need for the night.  there is a portmanteau of mine at mr.
somers's shop, which can be sent here in the morning."

"but we have not settled about the terms," said the elderly man,
beginning to feel rather doubtful whether he ought thus to have
installed in his home a stalwart pedestrian of whom he knew nothing,
and who, though talking glibly enough on other things, had preserved
an ominous silence on the subject of payment.

"terms? true, name them."

"including board?"

"certainly.  chameleons live on air; democrats on wind bags.  i have a
more vulgar appetite, and require mutton."

"meat is very dear now-a-days," said the elderly man, "and i am
afraid, for board and lodging i cannot charge you less than l3
3s.,--say l3 a week.  my lodgers usually pay a week in advance."

"agreed," said kenelm, extracting three sovereigns from his purse.  "i
have dined already: i want nothing more this evening; let me detain
you no further.  be kind enough to shut the door after you."

when he was alone, kenelm seated himself in the recess of the bay
window, against the casement, and looked forth intently.  yes; he was
right: he could see from thence the home of lily.  not, indeed, more
than a white gleam of the house through the interstices of trees and
shrubs, but the gentle lawn sloping to the brook, with the great
willow at the end dipping its boughs into the water, and shutting out
all view beyond itself by its bower of tender leaves.  the young man
bent his face on his hands and mused dreamily: the evening deepened;
the stars came forth; the rays of the moon now peered aslant through
the arching dips of the willow, silvering their way as they stole to
the waves below.

"shall i bring lights, sir? or do you prefer a lamp or candles?" asked
a voice behind,--the voice of the elderly man's wife.  "do you like
the shutters closed?"

the question startled the dreamer.  they seemed mocking his own old
mockings on the romance of love.  lamp or candles, practical lights
for prosaic eyes, and shutters closed against moon and stars!

"thank you, ma'am, not yet," he said; and rising quietly he placed his
hand on the window-sill, swung himself through the open casement, and
passed slowly along the margin of the rivulet, by a path checkered
alternately with shade and starlight; the moon yet more slowly rising
above the willows, and lengthening its track along the wavelets.



chapter iii.

though kenelm did not think it necessary at present to report to his
parents or his london acquaintances his recent movements and his
present resting-place, it never entered into his head to lurk /perdu/
in the immediate vicinity of lily's house, and seek opportunities of
meeting her clandestinely.  he walked to mrs. braefield's the next
morning, found her at home, and said in rather a more off-hand manner
than was habitual to him, "i have hired a lodging in your
neighbourhood, on the banks of the brook, for the sake of its
trout-fishing.  so you will allow me to call on you sometimes, and one
of these days i hope you will give me the dinner i so unceremoniously
rejected some days ago.  i was then summoned away suddenly, much
against my will."

"yes; my husband said that you shot off from him with a wild
exclamation about duty."

"quite true; my reason, and i may say my conscience, were greatly
perplexed upon a matter extremely important and altogether new to me.
i went to oxford,--the place above all others in which questions of
reason and conscience are most deeply considered, and perhaps least
satisfactorily solved.  relieved in my mind by my visit to a
distinguished ornament of that university, i felt i might indulge in a
summer holiday, and here i am."

"ah!  i understand.  you had religious doubts,--thought perhaps of
turning roman catholic.  i hope you are not going to do so?"

"my doubts were not necessarily of a religious nature.  pagans have
entertained them."

"whatever they were i am pleased to see they did not prevent your
return," said mrs. braefield, graciously.  "but where have you found a
lodging; why not have come to us?  my husband would have been scarcely
less glad than myself to receive you."

"you say that so sincerely, and so cordially, that to answer by a
brief 'i thank you' seems rigid and heartless.  but there are times in
life when one yearns to be alone,--to commune with one's own heart,
and, if possible, be still; i am in one of those moody times.  bear
with me."

mrs. braefield looked at him with affectionate, kindly interest.  she
had gone before him through the solitary road of young romance.  she
remembered her dreamy, dangerous girlhood, when she, too, had yearned
to be alone.

"bear with you; yes, indeed.  i wish, mr. chillingly, that i were your
sister, and that you would confide in me.  something troubles you."

"troubles me,--no.  my thoughts are happy ones, and they may sometimes
perplex me, but they do not trouble."

kenelm said this very softly; and in the warmer light of his musing
eyes, the sweeter play of his tranquil smile, there was an expression
which did not belie his words.

"you have not told me where you have found a lodging," said mrs.
braefield, somewhat abruptly.

"did i not?"  replied kenelm, with an unconscious start, as from an
abstracted reverie.  "with no undistinguished host, i presume, for
when i asked him this morning for the right address of this cottage,
in order to direct such luggage as i have to be sent there, he gave me
his card with a grand air, saying, 'i am pretty well known at
moleswich, by and beyond it.' i have not yet looked at his card.  oh,
here it is,--'algernon sidney gale jones, cromwell lodge;' you laugh.
what do you know of him?"

"i wish my husband were here; he would tell you more about him.  mr.
jones is quite a character."

"so i perceive."

"a great radical,--very talkative and troublesome at the vestry; but
our vicar, mr. emlyn, says there is no real harm in him, that his bark
is worse than his bite, and that his republican or radical notions
must be laid to the door of his godfathers!  in addition to his name
of jones, he was unhappily christened gale; gale jones being a noted
radical orator at the time of his birth.  and i suppose algernon
sidney was prefixed to gale in order to devote the new-born more
emphatically to republican principles."

"naturally, therefore, algernon sidney gale jones baptizes his house
cromwell lodge, seeing that algernon sidney held the protectorate in
especial abhorrence, and that the original gale jones, if an honest
radical, must have done the same, considering what rough usage the
advocates of parliamentary reform met with at the hands of his
highness.  but we must be indulgent to men who have been unfortunately
christened before they had any choice of the names that were to rule
their fate.  i myself should have been less whimsical had i not been
named after a kenelm who believed in sympathetic powders.  apart from
his political doctrines, i like my landlord: he keeps his wife in
excellent order.  she seems frightened at the sound of her own
footsteps, and glides to and fro, a pallid image of submissive
womanhood in list slippers."

"great recommendations certainly, and cromwell lodge is very prettily
situated.  by the by, it is very near mrs. cameron's."

"now i think of it, so it is," said kenelm, innocently.  ah! my friend
kenelm, enemy of shams, and truth-teller, /par excellence/, what hast
thou come to?  how are the mighty fallen!  "since you say you will
dine with us, suppose we fix the day after to-morrow, and i will ask
mrs. cameron and lily."

"the day after to-morrow: i shall be delighted."

"an early hour?"

"the earlier the better."

"is six o'clock too early?"

"too early! certainly not; on the contrary.  good-day: i must now go
to mrs. somers; she has charge of my portmanteau."

then kenelm rose.

"poor dear lily!" said mrs. braefield; "i wish she were less of a
child."

kenelm reseated himself.

"is she a child?  i don't think she is actually a child."

"not in years; she is between seventeen and eighteen: but my husband
says that she is too childish to talk to, and always tells me to take
her off his hands; he would rather talk with mrs. cameron."

"indeed!"

"still i find something in her."

"indeed!"

"not exactly childish, nor quite womanish."

"what then?"

"i can't exactly define.  but you know what mr. melville and mrs.
cameron call her as a pet name?"

"no."

"fairy!  fairies have no age; fairy is neither child nor woman."

"fairy.  she is called fairy by those who know her best?  fairy!"

"and she believes in fairies."

"does she?--so do i.  pardon me, i must be off.  the day after
to-morrow,--six o'clock."

"wait one moment," said elsie, going to her writing-table.  "since you
pass grasmere on your way home, will you kindly leave this note?"

"i thought grasmere was a lake in the north?"

"yes; but mr. melville chose to call the cottage by the name of the
lake.  i think the first picture he ever sold was a view of
wordsworth's house there.  here is my note to ask mrs. cameron to meet
you; but if you object to be my messenger--"

"object! my dear mrs. braefield.  as you say, i pass close by the
cottage."



chapter iv.

kenelm went with somewhat rapid pace from mrs. braefield's to the shop
in the high street kept by will somers.  jessie was behind the
counter, which was thronged with customers.  kenelm gave her a brief
direction about his portmanteau, and then passed into the back
parlour, where her husband was employed on his baskets,--with the
baby's cradle in the corner, and its grandmother rocking it
mechanically, as she read a wonderful missionary tract full of tales
of miraculous conversions: into what sort of christians we will not
pause to inquire.

"and so you are happy, will?" said kenelm, seating himself between the
basket-maker and the infant; the dear old mother beside him, reading
the tract which linked her dreams of life eternal with life just
opening in the cradle that she rocked.  he not happy!  how he pitied
the man who could ask such a question.

"happy, sir!  i should think so, indeed.  there is not a night on
which jessie and i, and mother too, do not pray that some day or other
you may be as happy.  by and by the baby will learn to pray 'god bless
papa, and mamma, grandmamma, and mr. chillingly.'"

"there is some one else much more deserving of prayers than i, though
needing them less.  you will know some day: pass it by now.  to return
to the point: you are happy; if i asked why, would you not say,
'because i have married the girl i love, and have never repented'?"

"well, sir, that is about it; though, begging your pardon, i think it
could be put more prettily somehow."

"you are right there.  but perhaps love and happiness never yet found
any words that could fitly express them.  good-bye, for the present."

ah! if it were as mere materialists, or as many middle-aged or elderly
folks, who, if materialists, are so without knowing it, unreflectingly
say, "the main element of happiness is bodily or animal health and
strength," that question which chillingly put would appear a very
unmeaning or a very insulting one addressed to a pale cripple, who
however improved of late in health, would still be sickly and ailing
all his life,--put, too, by a man of the rarest conformation of
physical powers that nature can adapt to physical enjoyment,--a man
who, since the age in which memory commences, had never known what it
was to be unwell, who could scarcely understand you if you talked of a
finger-ache, and whom those refinements of mental culture which
multiply the delights of the senses had endowed with the most
exquisite conceptions of such happiness as mere nature and its
instincts can give!  but will did not think the question unmeaning or
insulting.  he, the poor cripple, felt a vast superiority on the scale
of joyous being over the young hercules, well born, cultured, and
wealthy, who could know so little of happiness as to ask the crippled
basket-maker if he were happy.--he, blessed husband and father!



chapter v.

lily was seated on the grass under a chestnut-tree on the lawn.  a
white cat, not long emerged from kittenhood, curled itself by her
side.  on her lap was an open volume, which she was reading with the
greatest delight.

mrs. cameron came from the house, looked round, perceived the girl,
and approached; and either she moved so gently, or lily was so
absorbed in the book, that the latter was not aware of her presence
till she felt a light hand on her shoulder, and, looking up,
recognized her aunt's gentle face.

"ah!  fairy, fairy, that silly book, when you ought to be at your
french verbs.  what will your guardian say when he comes and finds you
have so wasted time?"

"he will say that fairies never waste their time; and he will scold
you for saying so."  therewith lily threw down the book, sprang to her
feet, wound her arm round mrs. cameron's neck, and kissed her fondly.
"there! is that wasting time?  i love you so, aunty.  in a day like
this i think i love everybody and everything!"  as she said this, she
drew up her lithe form, looked into the blue sky, and with parted lips
seemed to drink in air and sunshine.  then she woke up the dozing cat,
and began chasing it round the lawn.

mrs. cameron stood still, regarding her with moistened eyes.  just at
that moment kenelm entered through the garden gate.  he, too, stood
still, his eyes fixed on the undulating movements of fairy's exquisite
form.  she had arrested her favourite, and was now at play with it,
shaking off her straw hat, and drawing the ribbon attached to it
tantalizingly along the smooth grass.  her rich hair, thus released
and dishevelled by the exercise, fell partly over her face in wavy
ringlets; and her musical laugh and words of sportive endearment
sounded on kenelm's ear more joyously than the thrill of the skylark,
more sweetly than the coo of the ring-dove.

he approached towards mrs. cameron.  lily turned suddenly and saw him.
instinctively she smoothed back her loosened tresses, replaced the
straw hat, and came up demurely to his side just as he had accosted
her aunt.

"pardon my intrusion, mrs. cameron.  i am the bearer of this note from
mrs. braefield."  while the aunt read the note, he turned to the
niece.

"you promised to show me the picture, miss mordaunt."

"but that was a long time ago."

"too long to expect a lady's promise to be kept?"

lily seemed to ponder that question, and hesitated before she
answered.

"i will show you the picture.  i don't think i ever broke a promise
yet, but i shall be more careful how i make one in future."

"why so?"

"because you did not value mine when i made it, and that hurt me."
lily lifted up her head with a bewitching stateliness, and added
gravely, "i was offended."

"mrs. braefield is very kind," said mrs. cameron; "she asks us to dine
the day after to-morrow.  you would like to go, lily?"

"all grown-up people, i suppose?  no, thank you, dear aunt.  you go
alone, i would rather stay at home.  may i have little clemmy to play
with?  she will bring juba, and blanche is very partial to juba,
though she does scratch him."

"very well, my dear, you shall have your playmate, and i will go by
myself."

kenelm stood aghast.  "you will not go, miss mordaunt; mrs. braefield
will be so disappointed.  and if you don't go, whom shall i have to
talk to?  i don't like grown-up people better than you do."

"you are going?"

"certainly."

"and if i go you will talk to me?  i am afraid of mr. braefield.  he
is so wise."

"i will save you from him, and will not utter a grain of wisdom."

"aunty, i will go."

here lily made a bound and caught up blanche, who, taking her kisses
resignedly, stared with evident curiosity upon kenelm.

here a bell within the house rang the announcement of luncheon.  mrs.
cameron invited kenelm to partake of that meal.  he felt as romulus
might have felt when first invited to taste the ambrosia of the gods.
yet certainly that luncheon was not such as might have pleased kenelm
chillingly in the early days of the temperance hotel.  but somehow or
other of late he had lost appetite; and on this occasion a very modest
share of a very slender dish of chicken fricasseed, and a few cherries
daintily arranged on vine leaves, which lily selected for him,
contented him,--as probably a very little ambrosia contented romulus
while feasting his eyes on hebe.

luncheon over, while mrs. cameron wrote her reply to elsie, kenelm was
conducted by lily into her own /own/ room, in vulgar parlance her
/boudoir/, though it did not look as if any one ever /bouder'd/ there.
it was exquisitely pretty,--pretty not as a woman's, but as a child's
dream of the own /own/ room she would like to have,--wondrously neat
and cool, and pure-looking; a trellis paper, the trellis gay with
roses and woodbine, and birds and butterflies; draperies of muslin,
festooned with dainty tassels and ribbons; a dwarf bookcase, that
seemed well stored, at least as to bindings; a dainty little
writing-table in french /marqueterie/, looking too fresh and spotless
to have known hard service.  the casement was open, and in keeping
with the trellis paper; woodbine and roses from without encroached on
the window-sides, gently stirred by the faint summer breeze, and
wafted sweet odours into the little room.  kenelm went to the window,
and glanced on the view beyond.  "i was right," he said to himself; "i
divined it."  but though he spoke in a low inward whisper, lily, who
had watched his movements in surprise, overheard.

"you divined it.  divined what?"

"nothing, nothing; i was but talking to myself."

"tell me what you divined: i insist upon it!" and fairy petulantly
stamped her tiny foot on the floor.

"do you?  then i obey.  i have taken a lodging for a short time on the
other side of the brook,--cromwell lodge,--and seeing your house as i
passed, i divined that your room was in this part of it.  how soft
here is the view of the water!  ah! yonder is izaak walton's
summer-house."

"don't talk about izaak walton, or i shall quarrel with you, as i did
with lion when he wanted me to like that cruel book."

"who is lion?"

"lion,--of course, my guardian.  i called him lion when i was a little
child.  it was on seeing in one of his books a print of a lion playing
with a little child."

"ah!  i know the design well," said kenelm, with a slight sigh.  "it
is from an antique greek gem.  it is not the lion that plays with the
child, it is the child that masters the lion, and the greeks called
the child 'love.'"

this idea seemed beyond lily's perfect comprehension.  she paused
before she answered, with the naivete of a child six years old,--

"i see now why i mastered blanche, who will not make friends with any
one else: i love blanche.  ah, that reminds me,--come and look at the
picture."

she went to the wall over the writing-table, drew a silk curtain aside
from a small painting in a dainty velvet framework, and pointing to
it, cried with triumph, "look there! is it not beautiful?"

kenelm had been prepared to see a landscape, or a group, or anything
but what he did see: it was the portrait of blanche when a kitten.

little elevated though the subject was, it was treated with graceful
fancy.  the kitten had evidently ceased from playing with the cotton
reel that lay between her paws, and was fixing her gaze intently on a
bulfinch that had lighted on a spray within her reach.

"you understand," said lily, placing her hand on his arm, and drawing
him towards what she thought the best light for the picture; "it is
blanche's first sight of a bird.  look well at her face; don't you see
a sudden surprise,--half joy, half fear?  she ceases to play with the
reel.  her intellect--or, as mr. braefield would say, 'her
instinct'--is for the first time aroused.  from that moment blanche
was no longer a mere kitten.  and it required, oh, the most careful
education, to teach her not to kill the poor little birds.  she never
does now, but i had such trouble with her."

"i cannot say honestly that i do see all that you do in the picture;
but it seems to me very simply painted, and was, no doubt, a striking
likeness of blanche at that early age."

"so it was.  lion drew the first sketch from life with his pencil; and
when he saw how pleased i was with it--he was so good--he put it on
canvas, and let me sit by him while he painted it.  then he took it
away, and brought it back finished and framed as you see, last may, a
present for my birthday."

"you were born in may--with the flowers."

"the best of all the flowers are born in may,--violets."

"but they are born in the shade, and cling to it.  surely, as a child
of may, you love the sun!"

"i love the sun; it is never too bright nor too warm for me.  but i
don't think that, though born in may, i was born in sunlight.  i feel
more like my own native self when i creep into the shade and sit down
alone.  i can weep then."

as she thus shyly ended, the character of her whole countenance was
changed: its infantine mirthfulness was gone; a grave, thoughtful,
even a sad expression settled on the tender eyes and the tremulous
lips.

kenelm was so touched that words failed him, and there was silence for
some moments between the two.  at length kenelm said, slowly,--

"you say your own native self.  do you, then, feel, as i often do,
that there is a second, possibly a /native/, self, deep hid beneath
the self,--not merely what we show to the world in common (that may be
merely a mask), but the self that we ordinarily accept even when in
solitude as our own, an inner innermost self, oh so different and so
rarely coming forth from its hiding-place, asserting its right of
sovereignty, and putting out the other self as the sun puts out a
star?"

had kenelm thus spoken to a clever man of the world--to a chillingly
mivers, to a chillingly gordon--they certainly would not have
understood him.  but to such men he never would have thus spoken.  he
had a vague hope that this childlike girl, despite so much of
childlike talk, would understand him; and she did at once.

advancing close to him, again laying her hand on his arm, and looking
up towards his bended face with startled wondering eyes, no longer
sad, yet not mirthful,--

"how true!  you have felt that too?  where /is/ that innermost self,
so deep down,--so deep; yet when it does come forth, so much
higher,--higher,--immeasurably higher than one's everyday self?  it
does not tame the butterflies; it longs to get to the stars.  and
then,--and then,--ah, how soon it fades back again!  you have felt
that.  does it not puzzle you?"

"very much."

"are there no wise books about it that help to explain?"

"no wise books in my very limited reading even hint at the puzzle.  i
fancy that it is one of those insoluble questions that rest between
the infant and his maker.  mind and soul are not the same things, and
what you and i call 'wise men' are always confounding the two--"

fortunately for all parties--especially the reader; for kenelm had
here got on the back of one of his most cherished hobbies, the
distinction between psychology and metaphysics, soul and mind
scientifically or logically considered--mrs. cameron here entered the
room, and asked him how he liked the picture.

"very much.  i am no great judge of the art.  but it pleased me at
once, and now that miss mordaunt has interpreted the intention of the
painter i admire it yet more."

"lily chooses to interpret his intention in her own way, and insists
that blanche's expression of countenance conveys an idea of her
capacity to restrain her destructive instinct, and be taught to
believe that it is wrong to kill birds for mere sport.  for food she
need not kill them, seeing that lily takes care that she has plenty to
eat.  but i don't think that mr. melville had the slightest suspicion
that he had indicated that capacity in his picture."

"he must have done so, whether he suspected it or not," said lily,
positively; "otherwise he would not be truthful."

"why not truthful?" asked kenelm.

"don't you see?  if you were called upon to describe truthfully the
character of any little child, would you only speak of such naughty
impulses as all children have in common, and not even hint at the
capacity to be made better?"

"admirably put!" said kenelm.  "there is no doubt that a much fiercer
animal than a cat--a tiger, for instance, or a conquering hero--may be
taught to live on the kindest possible terms with the creatures on
which it was its natural instinct to prey."

"yes, yes; hear that, aunty!  you remember the happy family that we
saw eight years ago, at moleswich fair, with a cat not half so nice as
blanche allowing a mouse to bite her ear?  well, then, would lion not
have been shamefully false to blanche if he had not"--

lily paused and looked half shyly, half archly, at kenelm, then added,
in slow, deep-drawn tones--"given a glimpse of her innermost self?"

"innermost self!" repeated mrs. cameron, perplexed and laughing
gently.

lily stole nearer to kenelm and whispered,--

"is not one's innermost self one's best self?"

kenelm smiled approvingly.  the fairy was rapidly deepening her spell
upon him.  if lily had been his sister, his betrothed, his wife, how
fondly he would have kissed her!  she had expressed a thought over
which he had often inaudibly brooded, and she had clothed it with all
the charm of her own infantine fancy and womanlike tenderness.  goethe
has said somewhere, or is reported to have said, "there is something
in every man's heart, that, if you knew it, would make you hate him."
what goethe said, still more what goethe is reported to have said, is
never to be taken quite literally.  no comprehensive genius--genius at
once poet and thinker--ever can be so taken.  the sun shines on a
dunghill.  but the sun has no predilection for a dunghill.  it only
comprehends a dunghill as it does a rose.  still kenelm had always
regarded that loose ray from goethe's prodigal orb with an abhorrence
most unphilosophical for a philosopher so young as generally to take
upon oath any words of so great a master.  kenelm thought that the
root of all private benevolence, of all enlightened advance in social
reform, lay in the adverse theorem,--that in every man's nature there
lies a something that, could we get at it, cleanse it, polish it,
render it visibly clear to our eyes, would make us love him. and in
this spontaneous, uncultured sympathy with the results of so many
laborious struggles of his own scholastic intellect against the dogma
of the german giant, he felt as if he had found a younger--true, but
oh, how much more subduing, because so much younger--sister of his own
man's soul.  then came, so strongly, the sense of her sympathy with
his own strange innermost self, which a man will never feel more than
once in his life with a daughter of eve, that he dared not trust
himself to speak.  he somewhat hurried his leave-taking.

passing in the rear of the garden towards the bridge which led to his
lodging, he found on the opposite bank, at the other end of the
bridge, mr. algernon sidney gale jones peacefully angling for trout.

"will you not try the stream to-day, sir?  take my rod."  kenelm
remembered that lily had called izaak walton's book "a cruel one," and
shaking his head gently, went his way into the house.  there he seated
himself silently by the window, and looked towards the grassy lawn and
the dipping willows, and the gleam of the white walls through the
girdling trees, as he had looked the eve before.

"ah!" he murmured at last, "if, as i hold, a man but tolerably good
does good unconsciously merely by the act of living,--if he can no
more traverse his way from the cradle to the grave, without letting
fall, as he passes, the germs of strength, fertility, and beauty, than
can a reckless wind or a vagrant bird, which, where it passes, leaves
behind it the oak, the corn-sheaf, or the flower,--ah, if that be so,
how tenfold the good must be, if the man find the gentler and purer
duplicate of his own being in that mysterious, undefinable union which
shakspeares and day-labourers equally agree to call love; which newton
never recognizes, and which descartes (his only rival in the realms of
thought at once severe and imaginative) reduces into links of early
association, explaining that he loved women who squinted, because,
when he was a boy, a girl with that infirmity squinted at him from the
other side of his father's garden-wall!  ah! be this union between man
and woman what it may; if it be really love, really the bond which
embraces the innermost and bettermost self of both,--how daily,
hourly, momently, should we bless god for having made it so easy to be
happy and to be good!"



chapter vi.

the dinner-party at mr. braefield's was not quite so small as kenelm
had anticipated.  when the merchant heard from his wife that kenelm
was coming, he thought it would be but civil to the young gentleman to
invite a few other persons to meet him.

"you see, my dear," he said to elsie, "mrs. cameron is a very good,
simple sort of woman, but not particularly amusing; and lily, though a
pretty girl, is so exceedingly childish.  we owe much, my sweet elsie,
to this mr. chillingly,"--here there was a deep tone of feeling in his
voice and look,--"and we must make it as pleasant for him as we can.
i will bring down my friend sir thomas, and you ask mr. emlyn and his
wife.  sir thomas is a very sensible man, and emlyn a very learned
one.  so mr. chillingly will find people worth talking to.  by the by,
when i go to town i will send down a haunch of venison from groves's."

so when kenelm arrived, a little before six o'clock, he found in the
drawing-room the rev. charles emlyn, vicar of moleswich proper, with
his spouse, and a portly middle-aged man, to whom, as sir thomas
pratt, kenelm was introduced.  sir thomas was an eminent city banker.
the ceremonies of introduction over, kenelm stole to elsie's side.

"i thought i was to meet mrs. cameron.  i don't see her."

"she will be here presently.  it looks as if it might rain, and i have
sent the carriage for her and lily.  ah, here they are!"

mrs. cameron entered, clothed in black silk.  she always wore black;
and behind her came lily, in the spotless colour that became her name;
no ornament, save a slender gold chain to which was appended a single
locket, and a single blush rose in her hair.  she looked wonderfully
lovely; and with that loveliness there was a certain nameless air of
distinction, possibly owing to delicacy of form and colouring;
possibly to a certain grace of carriage, which was not without a
something of pride.

mr. braefield, who was a very punctual man, made a sign to his
servant, and in another moment or so dinner was announced.  sir
thomas, of course, took in the hostess; mr. braefield, the vicar's
wife (she was a dean's daughter); kenelm, mrs. cameron; and the vicar,
lily.

on seating themselves at the table kenelm was on the left hand, next
to the hostess, and separated from lily by mrs. cameron and mr. emlyn;
and when the vicar had said grace, lily glanced behind his back and
her aunt's at kenelm (who did the same thing), making at him what the
french call a /moue/.  the pledge to her had been broken.  she was
between two men very much grown up,--the vicar and the host.  kenelm
returned the /moue/ with a mournful smile and an involuntary shrug.

all was silent till, after his soup and his first glass of sherry, sir
thomas began,--

"i think, mr. chillingly, we have met before, though i had not the
honour then of making your acquaintance."  sir thomas paused before he
added, "not long ago; the last state ball at buckingham palace."

kenelm bent his head acquiescingly.  he had been at that ball.

"you were talking with a very charming woman,--a friend of mine,--lady
glenalvon."

(sir thomas was lady glenalvon's banker.)

"i remember perfectly," said kenelm.  "we were seated in the picture
gallery.  you came to speak to lady glenalvon, and i yielded to you my
place on the settee."

"quite true; and i think you joined a young lady, very handsome,--the
great heiress, miss travers."

kenelm again bowed, and, turning away as politely as he could,
addressed himself to mrs. cameron.  sir thomas, satisfied that he had
impressed on his audience the facts of his friendship with lady
glenalvon and his attendance at the court ball, now directed his
conversational powers towards the viear, who, utterly foiled in the
attempt to draw out lily, met the baronet's advances with the ardour
of a talker too long suppressed.  kenelm continued, unmolested, to
ripen his acquaintance with mrs. cameron.  she did not, however, seem
to lend a very attentive ear to his preliminary commonplace remarks
about scenery or weather, but at his first pause, said,--

"sir thomas spoke about a miss travers: is she related to a gentleman
who was once in the guards, leopold travers?"

"she is his daughter.  did you ever know leopold travers?"

"i have heard him mentioned by friends of mine long ago,--long ago,"
replied mrs. cameron with a sort of weary languor, not unwonted, in
her voice and manner; and then, as if dismissing the bygone
reminiscence from her thoughts, changed the subject.

"lily tells me, mr. chillingly, that you said you were staying at mr.
jones's, cromwell lodge.  i hope you are made comfortable there."

"very.  the situation is singularly pleasant."

"yes, it is considered the prettiest spot on the brook-side, and used
to be a favourite resort for anglers; but the trout, i believe, are
growing scarce; at least, now that the fishing in the thames is
improved, poor mr. jones complains that his old lodgers desert him.
of course you took the rooms for the sake of the fishing.  i hope the
sport may be better than it is said to be."

"it is of little consequence to me: i do not care much about fishing;
and since miss mordaunt calls the book which first enticed me to take
to it 'a cruel one,' i feel as if the trout had become as sacred as
crocodiles were to the ancient egyptians."

"lily is a foolish child on such matters.  she cannot bear the thought
of giving pain to any dumb creature; and just before our garden there
are a few trout which she has tamed.  they feed out of her hand; she
is always afraid they will wander away and get caught."

"but mr. melville is an angler?"

"several years ago he would sometimes pretend to fish, but i believe
it was rather an excuse for lying on the grass and reading 'the cruel
book,' or perhaps, rather, for sketching.  but now he is seldom here
till autumn, when it grows too cold for such amusement."

here sir thomas's voice was so loudly raised that it stopped the
conversation between kenelm and mrs. cameron.  he had got into some
question of politics on which he and the vicar did not agree, and the
discussion threatened to become warm, when mrs. braefield, with a
woman's true tact, broached a new topic, in which sir thomas was
immediately interested, relating to the construction of a conservatory
for orchids that he meditated adding to his country-house, and in
which frequent appeal was made to mrs. cameron, who was considered an
accomplished florist, and who seemed at some time or other in her life
to have acquired a very intimate acquaintance with the costly family
of orchids.

when the ladies retired kenelm found himself seated next to mr. emlyn,
who astounded him by a complimentary quotation from one of his own
latin prize poems at the university, hoped he would make some stay at
moleswich, told him of the principal places in the neighbourhood worth
visiting, and offered him the run of his library, which he flattered
himself was rather rich, both in the best editions of greek and latin
classics and in early english literature.  kenelm was much pleased
with the scholarly vicar, especially when mr. emlyn began to speak
about mrs. cameron and lily.  of the first he said, "she is one of
those women in whom quiet is so predominant that it is long before one
can know what undercurrents of good feeling flow beneath the unruffled
surface.  i wish, however, she was a little more active in the
management and education of her niece,--a girl in whom i feel a very
anxious interest, and whom i doubt if mrs. cameron understands.
perhaps, however, only a poet, and a very peculiar sort of poet, can
understand her: lily mordaunt is herself a poem."

"i like your definition of her," said kenelm.  "there is certainly
something about her which differs much from the prose of common life."

"you probably know wordsworth's lines:


   "'  .  .  .  and she shall lean her ear
     in many a secret place
     where rivulets dance their wayward round,
     and beauty, born of murmuring sound,
     shall pass into her face.'


"they are lines that many critics have found unintelligible; but lily
seems like the living key to them."

kenelm's dark face lighted up, but he made no answer.

"only," continued mr. emlyn, "how a girl of that sort, left wholly to
herself, untrained, undisciplined, is to grow up into the practical
uses of womanhood, is a question that perplexes and saddens me."

"any more wine?" asked the host, closing a conversation on commercial
matters with sir thomas.  "no?--shall we join the ladies?"



chapter vii.

the drawing-room was deserted; the ladies were in the garden.  as
kenelm and mr. emlyn walked side by side towards the group (sir thomas
and mr. braefield following at a little distance), the former asked,
somewhat abruptly, "what sort of man is miss cameron's guardian, mr.
melville?"

"i can scarcely answer that question.  i see little of him when he
comes here.  formerly, he used to run down pretty often with a
harum-scarum set of young fellows, quartered at cromwell
lodge,--grasmere had no accommodation for them,--students in the
academy, i suppose.  for some years he has not brought those persons,
and when he does come himself it is but for a few days.  he has the
reputation of being very wild."

further conversation was here stopped.  the two men, while they thus
talked, had been diverging from the straight way across the lawn
towards the ladies, turning into sequestered paths through the
shrubbery; now they emerged into the open sward, just before a table,
on which coffee was served, and round which all the rest of the party
were gathered.

"i hope, mr. emlyn," said elsie's cheery voice, "that you have
dissuaded mr. chillingly from turning papist.  i am sure you have
taken time enough to do so."

mr. emlyn, protestant every inch of him, slightly recoiled from
kenelm's side.  "do you meditate turning--" he could not conclude the
sentence.

"be not alarmed, my dear sir.  i did but own to mrs. braefield that i
had paid a visit to oxford in order to confer with a learned man on a
question that puzzled me, and as abstract as that feminine pastime,
theology, is now-a-days.  i cannot convince mrs. braefield that oxford
admits other puzzles in life than those which amuse the ladies."  here
kenelm dropped into a chair by the side of lily.

lily half turned her back to him.

"have i offended again?"

lily shrugged her shoulders slightly and would not answer.

"i suspect, miss mordaunt, that among your good qualities, nature has
omitted one; the bettermost self within you should replace it."

lily here abruptly turned to him her front face: the light of the
skies was becoming dim, but the evening star shone upon it.

"how! what do you mean?"

"am i to answer politely or truthfully?"

"truthfully!  oh, truthfully!  what is life without truth?"

"even though one believes in fairies?"

"fairies are truthful, in a certain way.  but you are not truthful.
you were not thinking of fairies when you--"

"when i what?"

"found fault with me."

"i am not sure of that.  but i will translate to you my thoughts, so
far as i can read them myself, and to do so i will resort to the
fairies.  let us suppose that a fairy has placed her changeling into
the cradle of a mortal: that into the cradle she drops all manner of
fairy gifts which are not bestowed on mere mortals; but that one
mortal attribute she forgets.  the changeling grows up; she charms
those around her: they humour, and pet, and spoil her.  but there
arises a moment in which the omission of the one mortal gift is felt
by her admirers and friends.  guess what that is."

lily pondered.  "i see what you mean; the reverse of truthfulness,
politeness."

"no, not exactly that, though politeness slides into it unawares: it
is a very humble quality, a very unpoetic quality; a quality that many
dull people possess; and yet without it no fairy can fascinate
mortals, when on the face of the fairy settles the first wrinkle.  can
you not guess it now?"

"no: you vex me; you provoke me;" and lily stamped her foot
petulantly, as in kenelm's presence she had stamped it once before.
"speak plainly, i insist."

"miss mordaunt, excuse me: i dare not," said kenelm, rising with a
sort of bow one makes to the queen; and he crossed over to mrs.
braefield.

lily remained, still pouting fiercely.

sir thomas took the chair kenelm had vacated.



chapter viii.

the hour for parting came.  of all the guests, sir thomas alone stayed
at the house a guest for the night.  mr. and mrs. emlyn had their own
carriage.  mrs. braefield's carriage came to the door for mrs. cameron
and lily.

said lily, impatiently and discourteously, "who would not rather walk
on such a night?" and she whispered to her aunt.

mrs. cameron, listening to the whisper and obedient to every whim of
lily's, said, "you are too considerate, dear mrs. braefield; lily
prefers walking home; there is no chance of rain now."

kenelm followed the steps of the aunt and niece, and soon overtook
them on the brook-side.

"a charming night, mr. chillingly," said mrs. cameron.

"an english summer night; nothing like it in such parts of the world
as i have visited.  but, alas! of english summer nights there are but
few."

"you have travelled much abroad?"

"much, no, a little; chiefly on foot."

lily hitherto had not said a word, and had been walking with downcast
head.  now she looked up and said, in the mildest and most
conciliatory of human voices,--

"you have been abroad;" then, with an acquiescence in the manners of
the world which to him she had never yet manifested, she added his
name, "mr. chillingly," and went on, more familiarly.  "what a breadth
of meaning the word 'abroad' conveys!  away, afar from one's self,
from one's everyday life.  how i envy you! you have been abroad: so
has lion" (here drawing herself up), "i mean my guardian, mr.
melville."

"certainly, i have been abroad, but afar from myself--never.  it is an
old saying,--all old sayings are true; most new sayings are false,--a
man carries his native soil at the sole of his foot."

here the path somewhat narrowed.  mrs. cameron went on first, kenelm
and lily behind; she, of course, on the dry path, he on the dewy
grass.

she stopped him.  "you are walking in the wet, and with those thin
shoes."  lily moved instinctively away from the dry path.

homely though that speech of lily's be, and absurd as said by a
fragile girl to a gladiator like kenelm, it lit up a whole world of
womanhood: it showed all that undiscoverable land which was hidden to
the learned mr. emlyn, all that land which an uncomprehended girl
seizes and reigns over when she becomes wife and mother.

at that homely speech, and that impulsive movement, kenelm halted, in
a sort of dreaming maze.  he turned timidly, "can you forgive me for
my rude words?  i presumed to find fault with you."

"and so justly.  i have been thinking over all you said, and i feel
you were so right; only i still do not quite understand what you meant
by the quality for mortals which the fairy did not give to her
changeling."

"if i did not dare say it before, i should still less dare to say it
now."

"do."  there was no longer the stamp of the foot, no longer the flash
from her eyes, no longer the wilfulness which said, "i insist;"--"
do;" soothingly, sweetly, imploringly.

thus pushed to it, kenelm plucked up courage, and not trusting himself
to look at lily, answered brusquely,--

"the quality desirable for men, but more essential to women in
proportion as they are fairy-like, though the tritest thing possible,
is good temper."

lily made a sudden bound from his side, and joined her aunt, walking
through the wet grass.

when they reached the garden-gate, kenelm advanced and opened it.
lily passed him by haughtily; they gained the cottage-door.

"i don't ask you in at this hour," said mrs. cameron.  "it would be
but a false compliment."

kenelm bowed and retreated.  lily left her aunt's side, and came
towards him, extending her hand.

"i shall consider your words, mr. chillingly," she said, with a
strangely majestic air.  "at present i think you are not right.  i am
not ill-tempered; but--" here she paused, and then added with a
loftiness of mien which, had she not been so exquisitely pretty, would
have been rudeness--"in any case i forgive you."



chapter ix.

there were a good many pretty villas in the outskirts of moleswich,
and the owners of them were generally well off, and yet there was
little of what is called visiting society; owing perhaps to the fact
that there not being among these proprietors any persons belonging to
what is commonly called "the aristocratic class," there was a vast
deal of aristocratic pretension.  the family of mr. a-----, who had
enriched himself as a stock-jobber, turned up its nose at the family
of mr. b-----, who had enriched himself still more as a linen-draper,
while the family of mr. b----- showed a very cold shoulder to the
family of mr. c-----, who had become richer than either of them as a
pawnbroker, and whose wife wore diamonds, but dropped her h's.
england would be a community so aristocratic that there would be no
living in it, if one could exterminate what is now called
"aristocracy."  the braefields were the only persons who really drew
together the antagonistic atoms of the moleswich society, partly
because they were acknowledged to be the first persons there, in right
not only of old settlement (the braefields had held braefieldville for
four generations), but of the wealth derived from those departments of
commercial enterprise which are recognized as the highest, and of an
establishment considered to be the most elegant in the neighbourhood;
principally because elsie, while exceedingly genial and cheerful in
temper, had a certain power of will (as her runaway folly had
manifested), and when she got people together compelled them to be
civil to each other.  she had commenced this gracious career by
inaugurating children's parties, and when the children became friends
the parents necessarily grew closer together.  still her task had only
recently begun, and its effects were not in full operation.  thus,
though it became known at moleswich that a young gentleman, the heir
to a baronetcy and a high estate, was sojourning at cromwell lodge, no
overtures were made to him on the part of the a's, b's, and c's.  the
vicar, who called on kenelm the day after the dinner at
braefieldville, explained to him the social conditions of the place.
"you understand," said he, "that it will be from no want of courtesy
on the part of my neighbours if they do not offer you any relief from
the pleasures of solitude.  it will be simply because they are shy,
not because they are uncivil.  and, it is this consideration that
makes me, at the risk of seeming too forward, entreat you to look into
the vicarage any morning or evening on which you feel tired of your
own company; suppose you drink tea with us this evening,--you will
find a young lady whose heart you have already won."

"whose heart i have won!" faltered kenelm, and the warm blood rushed
to his cheek.

"but," continued the vicar, smiling, "she has no matrimonial designs
on you at present.  she is only twelve years old,--my little girl
clemmy."

"clemmy!--she is your daughter?  i did not know that.  i very
gratefully accept your invitation."

"i must not keep you longer from your amusement.  the sky is just
clouded enough for sport.  what fly do you use?"

"to say truth, i doubt if the stream has much to tempt me in the way
of trout, and i prefer rambling about the lanes and by-paths to


  "'the noiseless angler's solitary stand.'

"i am an indefatigable walker, and the home scenery round the place has
many charms for me.  besides," added kenelm, feeling conscious that he
ought to find some more plausible excuse than the charms of home
scenery for locating himself long in cromwell lodge, "besides, i
intend to devote myself a good deal to reading.  i have been very idle
of late, and the solitude of this place must be favourable to study."

"you are not intended, i presume, for any of the learned professions?"

"the learned professions," replied kenelm, "is an invidious form of
speech that we are doing our best to eradicate from the language.  all
professions now-a-days are to have much about the same amount of
learning.  the learning of the military profession is to be levelled
upwards, the learning of the scholastic to be levelled downwards.
cabinet ministers sneer at the uses of greek and latin.  and even such
masculine studies as law and medicine are to be adapted to the
measurements of taste and propriety in colleges for young ladies.  no,
i am not intended for any profession; but still an ignorant man like
myself may not be the worse for a little book-reading now and then."

"you seem to be badly provided with books here," said the vicar,
glancing round the room, in which, on a table in the corner, lay
half-a-dozen old-looking volumes, evidently belonging not to the
lodger but to the landlord.  "but, as i before said, my library is at
your service.  what branch of reading do you prefer?"

kenelm was, and looked, puzzled.  but after a pause he answered:

"the more remote it be from the present day, the better for me.  you
said your collection was rich in mediaeval literature.  but the middle
ages are so copied by the modern goths, that i might as well read
translations of chaucer or take lodgings in wardour street.  if you
have any books about the manners and habits of those who, according to
the newest idea in science, were our semi-human progenitors in the
transition state between a marine animal and a gorilla, i should be
very much edified by the loan."

"alas," said mr. emlyn, laughing, "no such books have been left to
us."

"no such books?  you must be mistaken.  there must be plenty of them
somewhere.  i grant all the wonderful powers of invention bestowed on
the creators of poetic romance; still not the sovereign masters in
that realm of literature--not scott, not cervantes, not goethe, not
even shakspeare--could have presumed to rebuild the past without such
materials as they found in the books that record it.  and though i, no
less cheerfully, grant that we have now living among us a creator of
poetic romance immeasurably more inventive than they,--appealing to
our credulity in portents the most monstrous, with a charm of style
the most conversationally familiar,--still i cannot conceive that even
that unrivalled romance-writer can so bewitch our understandings as to
make us believe that, if miss mordaunt's cat dislikes to wet her feet,
it is probably because in the prehistoric age her ancestors lived in
the dry country of egypt; or that when some lofty orator, a pitt or a
gladstone, rebuts with a polished smile which reveals his canine teeth
the rude assault of an opponent, he betrays his descent from a
'semi-human progenitor' who was accustomed to snap at his enemy.
surely, surely there must be some books still extant written by
philosophers before the birth of adam, in which there is authority,
even though but in mythic fable, for such poetic inventions.  surely,
surely some early chroniclers must depose that they saw, saw with
their own eyes, the great gorillas who scratched off their hairy
coverings to please the eyes of the young ladies of their species, and
that they noted the gradual metamorphosis of one animal into another.
for, if you tell me that this illustrious romance-writer is but a
cautious man of science, and that we must accept his inventions
according to the sober laws of evidence and fact, there is not the
most incredible ghost story which does not better satisfy the common
sense of a sceptic.  however, if you have no such books, lend me the
most unphilosophical you possess,--on magic, for instance,--the
philosopher's stone"--

"i have some of them," said the vicar, laughing; "you shall choose for
yourself."

"if you are going homeward, let me accompany you part of the way: i
don't yet know where the church and the vicarage are, and i ought to
know before i come in the evening."

kenelm and the vicar walked side by side, very sociably, across the
bridge and on the side of the rivulet on which stood mrs. cameron's
cottage.  as they skirted the garden pale at the rear of the cottage,
kenelm suddenly stopped in the middle of some sentence which had
interested mr. emlyn, and as suddenly arrested his steps on the turf
that bordered the lane.  a little before him stood an old peasant
woman, with whom lily, on the opposite side of the garden pale, was
conversing.  mr. emlyn did not at first see what kenelm saw; turning
round rather to gaze on his companion, surprised by his abrupt halt
and silence.  the girl put a small basket into the old woman's hand,
who then dropped a low curtsy, and uttered low a "god bless you."  low
though it was, kenelm overheard it, and said abstractedly to mr.
emlyn, "is there a greater link between this life and the next than
god's blessing on the young, breathed from the lips of the old?"



chapter x.

"and how is your good man, mrs. haley?" said the vicar, who had now
reached the spot on which the old woman stood,--with lily's fair face
still bended down to her,--while kenelm slowly followed him.

"thank you kindly, sir, he is better; out of his bed now.  the young
lady has done him a power of good--"

"hush!" said lily, colouring.  "make haste home now; you must not keep
him waiting for his dinner."

the old woman again curtsied, and went off at a brisk pace.

"do you know, mr. chillingly," said mr. emlyn, "that miss mordaunt is
the best doctor in the place?  though if she goes on making so many
cures she will find the number of her patients rather burdensome."

"it was only the other day," said lily, "that you scolded me for the
best cure i have yet made."

"i?--oh!  i remember; you led that silly child madge to believe that
there was a fairy charm in the arrowroot you sent her.  own you
deserved a scolding there."

"no, i did not.  i dressed the arrowroot, and am i not fairy?  i have
just got such a pretty note from clemmy, mr. emlyn, asking me to come
up this evening and see her new magic lantern.  will you tell her to
expect me?  and, mind, no scolding."

"and all magic?" said mr. emlyn; "be it so."

lily and kenelm had not hitherto exchanged a word.  she had replied
with a grave inclination of her head to his silent bow.  but now she
turned to him shyly and said, "i suppose you have been fishing all the
morning?"

"no; the fishes hereabout are under the protection of a fairy,--whom i
dare not displease."

lily's face brightened, and she extended her hand to him over the
palings.  "good-day; i hear aunty's voice: those dreadful french
verbs!"

she disappeared among the shrubs, amid which they heard the thrill of
her fresh young voice singing to herself.

"that child has a heart of gold," said mr. emlyn, as the two men
walked on.  "i did not exaggerate when i said she was the best doctor
in the place.  i believe the poor really do believe that she is a
fairy.  of course we send from the vicarage to our ailing parishioners
who require it, food and wine; but it never seems to do them the good
that her little dishes made by her own tiny hands do; and i don't know
if you noticed the basket that old woman took away,--miss lily taught
will somers to make the prettiest little baskets; and she puts her
jellies or other savouries into dainty porcelain gallipots nicely
fitted into the baskets, which she trims with ribbons.  it is the look
of the thing that tempts the appetite of the invalids, and certainly
the child may well be called fairy at present; but i wish mrs. cameron
would attend a little more strictly to her education.  she can't be a
fairy forever."

kenelm sighed, but made no answer.

mr. emlyn then turned the conversation to erudite subjects, and so
they came in sight of the town, when the vicar stopped and pointed
towards the church, of which the spire rose a little to the left, with
two aged yew-trees half shadowing the burial-ground, and in the rear a
glimpse of the vicarage seen amid the shrubs of its garden ground.

"you will know your way now," said the vicar; "excuse me if i quit
you: i have a few visits to make; among others, to poor haley, husband
to the old woman you saw.  i read to him a chapter in the bible every
day; yet still i fancy that he believes in fairy charms."

"better believe too much, than too little," said kenelm; and he turned
aside into the village and spent half-an-hour with will, looking at
the pretty baskets lily had taught will to make.  then, as he went
slowly homeward, he turned aside into the churchyard.

the church, built in the thirteenth century, was not large, but it
probably sufficed for its congregation, since it betrayed no signs of
modern addition; restoration or repair it needed not.  the centuries
had but mellowed the tints of its solid walls, as little injured by
the huge ivy stems that shot forth their aspiring leaves to the very
summit of the stately tower as by the slender roses which had been
trained to climb up a foot or so of the massive buttresses.  the site
of the burial-ground was unusually picturesque: sheltered towards the
north by a rising ground clothed with woods, sloping down at the south
towards the glebe pasture-grounds through which ran the brooklet,
sufficiently near for its brawling gurgle to be heard on a still day.
kenelm sat himself on an antique tomb, which was evidently
appropriated to some one of higher than common rank in bygone days,
but on which the sculpture was wholly obliterated.

the stillness and solitude of the place had their charms for his
meditative temperament; and he remained there long, forgetful of time,
and scarcely hearing the boom of the clock that warned him of its
lapse.

when suddenly, a shadow--the shadow of a human form--fell on the grass
on which his eyes dreamily rested.  he looked up with a start, and
beheld lily standing before him mute and still.  her image was so
present in his thoughts at the moment that he felt a thrill of awe, as
if the thoughts had conjured up her apparition.  she was the first to
speak.

"you here, too?" she said very softly, almost whisperingly.  "too!"
echoed kenelm, rising; "too!  'tis no wonder that i, a stranger to the
place, should find my steps attracted towards its most venerable
building.  even the most careless traveller, halting at some remote
abodes of the living, turns aside to gaze on the burial-ground of the
dead.  but my surprise is that you, miss mordaunt, should be attracted
towards the same spot."

"it is my favourite spot," said lily, "and always has been.  i have
sat many an hour on that tombstone.  it is strange to think that no
one knows who sleeps beneath it.  the 'guide book to moleswich,'
though it gives the history of the church from the reign in which it
was first built, can only venture a guess that this tomb, the grandest
and oldest in the burial-ground, is tenanted by some member of a
family named montfichet, that was once very powerful in the county,
and has become extinct since the reign of henry vi.  but," added lily,
"there is not a letter of the name montfichet left.  i found out more
than any one else has done; i learned black-letter on purpose; look
here," and she pointed to a small spot in which the moss had been
removed.  "do you see those figures? are they not xviii? and look
again, in what was once the line above the figures, ele.  it must have
been an eleanor, who died at the age of eighteen--"

"i rather think it more probable that the figures refer to the date of
the death, 1318 perhaps; and so far as i can decipher black-letter,
which is more in my father's line than mine, i think it is al, not el,
and that it seems as if there had been a letter between l and the
second e, which is now effaced.  the tomb itself is not likely to
belong to any powerful family then resident at the place.  their
monuments, according to usage, would have been within the
church,--probably in their own mortuary chapel."

"don't try to destroy my fancy," said lily, shaking her head; "you
cannot succeed, i know her history too well.  she was young, and some
one loved her, and built over her the finest tomb he could afford; and
see how long the epitaph must have been! how much it must have spoken
in her praise and of his grief.  and then he went his way, and the
tomb was neglected, and her fate forgotten."

"my dear miss mordaunt, this is indeed a wild romance to spin out of
so slender a thread.  but even if true, there is no reason to think
that a life is forgotten, though a tomb be neglected."

"perhaps not," said lily, thoughtfully.  "but when i am dead, if i can
look down, i think it would please me to see my grave not neglected by
those who had loved me once."

she moved from him as she said this, and went to a little mound that
seemed not long since raised; there was a simple cross at the head and
a narrow border of flowers round it.  lily knelt beside the flowers
and pulled out a stray weed.  then she rose, and said to kenelm, who
had followed, and now stood beside her,--

"she was the little grandchild of poor old mrs. hales.  i could not
cure her, though i tried hard: she was so fond of me, and died in my
arms.  no, let me not say 'died,'--surely there is no such thing as
dying.  'tis but a change of life,--


      'less than the void between two waves of air,
       the space between existence and a soul.'"


"whose lines are those?" asked kenelm.

"i don't know; i learnt them from lion.  don't you believe them to be
true?"

"yes.  but the truth does not render the thought of quitting this
scene of life for another more pleasing to most of us.  see how soft
and gentle and bright is all that living summer land beyond; let us
find subject for talk from that, not from the graveyard on which we
stand."

"but is there not a summer land fairer than that we see now; and which
we do see, as in a dream, best when we take subjects of talk from the
graveyard?"  without waiting for a reply, lily went on.  "i planted
these flowers: mr. emlyn was angry with me; he said it was 'popish.'
but he had not the heart to have them taken up; i come here very often
to see to them.  do you think it wrong?  poor little nell! she was so
fond of flowers.  and the eleanor in the great tomb, she too perhaps
knew some one who called her nell; but there are no flowers round her
tomb.  poor eleanor!"

she took the nosegay she wore on her bosom, and as she repassed the
tomb laid it on the mouldering stone.



chapter xi.

they quitted the burial-ground, taking their way to grasmere.  kenelm
walked by lily's side; not a word passed between them till they came
in sight of the cottage.

then lily stopped abruptly, and lifting towards him her charming face,
said,--

"i told you i would think over what you said to me last night.  i have
done so, and feel i can thank you honestly.  you were very kind: i
never before thought that i had a bad temper; no one ever told me so.
but i see now what you mean; sometimes i feel very quickly, and then i
show it.  but how did i show it to you, mr. chillingly?"

"did you not turn your back to me when i seated myself next you in
mrs. braefield's garden, vouchsafing me no reply when i asked if i had
offended?"

lily's face became bathed in blushes, and her voice faltered, as she
answered,--

"i was not offended; i was not in a bad temper then: it was worse than
that."

"worse? what could it possibly be?"

"i am afraid it was envy."

"envy of what? of whom?"

"i don't know how to explain; after all, i fear aunty is right, and
the fairy tales put very silly, very naughty thoughts into one's head.
when cinderella's sisters went to the king's ball, and cinderella was
left alone, did not she long to go too?  did not she envy her
sisters?"

"ah! i understand now: sir charles spoke of the court ball."

"and you were there talking with handsome ladies--and--oh!  i was so
foolish and felt sore."

"you, who when we first met wondered how people who could live in the
country preferred to live in towns, do then sometimes contradict
yourself, and sigh for the great world that lies beyond these quiet
water banks.  you feel that you have youth and beauty, and wish to be
admired!"

"it is not that exactly," said lily, with a perplexed look in her
ingenuous countenance, "and in my better moments, when the 'bettermost
self' comes forth, i know that i am not made for the great world you
speak of.  but you see--"  here she paused again, and as they had now
entered the garden, dropped wearily on a bench beside the path.
kenelm seated himself there too, waiting for her to finish her broken
sentence.

"you see," she continued, looking down embarrassed, and describing
vague circles on the gravel with her fairy-like foot, "that at home,
ever since i can remember, they have treated me as if--well, as if i
were--what shall i say? the child of one of your great ladies.  even
lion, who is so noble, so grand, seemed to think when i was a mere
infant that i was a little queen: once when i told a fib he did not
scold me; but i never saw him look so sad and so angry as when he
said, 'never again forget that you are a lady.' and, but i tire you--"

"tire me, indeed! go on."

"no, i have said enough to explain why i have at times proud thoughts,
and vain thoughts; and why, for instance, i said to myself, 'perhaps
my place of right is among those fine ladies whom he--' but it is all
over now."  she rose hastily with a pretty laugh, and bounded towards
mrs. cameron, who was walking slowly along the lawn with a book in her
hand.



chapter xii.

it was a very merry party at the vicarage that evening.  lily had not
been prepared to meet kenelm there, and her face brightened
wonderfully as at her entrance he turned from the book-shelves to
which mr. emlyn was directing his attention.  but instead of meeting
his advance, she darted off to the lawn, where clemmy and several
other children greeted her with a joyous shout.

"not acquainted with macleane's juvenal?" said the reverend scholar;
"you will be greatly pleased with it; here it is,--a posthumous work,
edited by george long.  i can lend you munro's lucretius, '69.  aha!
we have some scholars yet to pit against the germans."

"i am heartily glad to hear it," said kenelm.  "it will be a long time
before they will ever wish to rival us in that game which miss clemmy
is now forming on the lawn, and in which england has recently acquired
a european reputation."

"i don't take you.  what game?"

"puss in the corner.  with your leave i will look out and see whether
it be a winning game for puss--in the long-run."  kenelm joined the
children, amidst whom lily seemed not the least childlike.  resisting
all overtures from clemmy to join their play, he seated himself on a
sloping bank at a little distance,--an idle looker-on.  his eye
followed lily's nimble movements, his ear drank in the music of her
joyous laugh.  could that be the same girl whom he had seen tending
the flower-bed amid the gravestones?  mrs. emlyn came across the lawn
and joined him, seating herself also on the bank.  mrs. emlyn was an
exceedingly clever woman: nevertheless she was not formidable,--on the
contrary, pleasing; and though the ladies in the neighbourhood said
'she talked like a book,' the easy gentleness of her voice carried off
that offence.

"i suppose, mr. chillingly," said she, "i ought to apologize for my
husband's invitation to what must seem to you so frivolous an
entertainment as a child's party.  but when mr. emlyn asked you to
come to us this evening, he was not aware that clemmy had also invited
her young friends.  he had looked forward to rational conversation
with you on his own favourite studies."

"it is not so long since i left school, but that i prefer a half
holiday to lessons, even from a tutor so pleasant as mr. emlyn,--


     "'ah, happy years,--once more who would not be a boy!'"


"nay," said mrs. emlyn, with a grave smile.  "who that had started so
fairly as mr. chillingly in the career of man would wish to go back
and resume a place among boys?"

"but, my dear mrs. emlyn, the line i quoted was wrung from the heart
of a man who had already outstripped all rivals in the race-ground he
had chosen, and who at that moment was in the very maytime of youth
and of fame.  and if such a man at such an epoch in his career could
sigh to 'be once more a boy,' it must have been when he was thinking
of the boy's half holiday, and recoiling from the task work he was
condemned to learn as man."

"the line you quote is, i think, from 'childe harold,' and surely you
would not apply to mankind in general the sentiment of a poet so
peculiarly self-reflecting (if i may use that expression), and in whom
sentiment is often so morbid."

"you are right, mrs. emlyn," said kenelm, ingenuously.  "still a boy's
half holiday is a very happy thing; and among mankind in general there
must be many who would be glad to have it back again,--mr. emlyn
himself, i should think."

"mr. emlyn has his half holiday now.  do you not see him standing just
outside the window?  do you not hear him laughing?  he is a child
again in the mirth of his children.  i hope you will stay some time in
the neighbourhood; i am sure you and he will like each other.  and it
is such a rare delight to him to get a scholar like yourself to talk
to."

"pardon me, i am not a scholar; a very noble title that, and not to be
given to a lazy trifler on the surface of book-lore like myself."

"you are too modest.  my husband has a copy of your cambridge prize
verses, and says 'the latinity of them is quite beautiful.' i quote
his very words."

"latin verse-making is a mere knack, little more than a proof that one
had an elegant scholar for one's tutor, as i certainly had.  but it is
by special grace that a real scholar can send forth another real
scholar, and a kennedy produce a munro.  but to return to the more
interesting question of half holidays; i declare that clemmy is
leading off your husband in triumph.  he is actually going to be puss
in the corner."

"when you know more of charles,--i mean my husband,--you will discover
that his whole life is more or less of a holiday.  perhaps because he
is not what you accuse yourself of being: he is not lazy; he never
wishes to be a boy once more; and taskwork itself is holiday to him.
he enjoys shutting himself up in his study and reading; he enjoys a
walk with the children; he enjoys visiting the poor; he enjoys his
duties as a clergyman.  and though i am not always contented for him,
though i think he should have had those honours in his profession
which have been lavished on men with less ability and less learning,
yet he is never discontented himself.  shall i tell you his secret?"

"do."

"he is a /thanks-giving man/.  you, too, must have much to thank god
for, mr. chillingly; and in thanksgiving to god does there not blend
usefulness to man, and such sense of pastime in the usefulness as
makes each day a holiday?"

kenelm looked up into the quiet face of this obscure pastor's wife
with a startled expression in his own.

"i see, ma'am," said he, "that you have devoted much thought to the
study of the aesthetical philosophy as expounded by german thinkers,
whom it is rather difficult to understand."

"i, mr. chillingly! good gracious!  no!  what do you mean by your
aesthetical philosophy?"

"according to aesthetics, i believe man arrives at his highest state
of moral excellence when labour and duty lose all the harshness of
effort,--when they become the impulse and habit of life; when as the
essential attributes of the beautiful, they are, like beauty, enjoyed
as pleasure; and thus, as you expressed, each day becomes a holiday: a
lovely doctrine, not perhaps so lofty as that of the stoics, but more
bewitching.  only, very few of us can practically merge our cares and
our worries into so serene an atmosphere."

"some do so without knowing anything of aesthetics and with no
pretence to be stoics; but, then, they are christians."

"there are some such christians, no doubt; but they are rarely to be
met with.  take christendom altogether, and it appears to comprise the
most agitated population in the world; the population in which there
is the greatest grumbling as to the quantity of labour to be done, the
loudest complaints that duty instead of a pleasure is a very hard and
disagreeable struggle, and in which holidays are fewest and the moral
atmosphere least serene.  perhaps," added kenelm, with a deeper shade
of thought on his brow, "it is this perpetual consciousness of
struggle; this difficulty in merging toil into ease, or stern duty
into placid enjoyment; this refusal to ascend for one's self into the
calm of an air aloof from the cloud which darkens, and the hail-storm
which beats upon, the fellow-men we leave below,--that makes the
troubled life of christendom dearer to heaven, and more conducive to
heaven's design in rendering earth the wrestling-ground and not the
resting-place of man, than is that of the brahmin, ever seeking to
abstract himself from the christian's conflicts of action and desire,
and to carry into its extremest practice the aesthetic theory, of
basking undisturbed in the contemplation of the most absolute beauty
human thought can reflect from its idea of divine good!"

whatever mrs. emlyn might have said in reply was interrupted by the
rush of the children towards her; they were tired of play, and eager
for tea and the magic lantern.



chapter xiii.

the room is duly obscured and the white sheet attached to the wall;
the children are seated, hushed, and awe-stricken.  and kenelm is
placed next to lily.

the tritest things in our mortal experience are among the most
mysterious.  there is more mystery in the growth of a blade of grass
than there is in the wizard's mirror or the feats of a spirit medium.
most of us have known the attraction that draws one human being to
another, and makes it so exquisite a happiness to sit quiet and mute
by another's side; which stills for the moment the busiest thoughts in
our brain, the most turbulent desires in our heart, and renders us but
conscious of a present ineffable bliss.  most of us have known that.
but who has ever been satisfied with any metaphysical account of its
why or wherefore?  we can but say it is love, and love at that earlier
section of its history which has not yet escaped from romance; but by
what process that other person has become singled out of the whole
universe to attain such special power over one is a problem that,
though many have attempted to solve it, has never attained to
solution.  in the dim light of the room kenelm could only distinguish
the outlines of lily's delicate face, but at each new surprise in the
show, the face intuitively turned to his, and once, when the terrible
image of a sheeted ghost, pursuing a guilty man, passed along the
wall, she drew closer to him in her childish fright, and by an
involuntary innocent movement laid her hand on his.  he detained it
tenderly, but, alas! it was withdrawn the next moment; the ghost was
succeeded by a couple of dancing dogs.  and lily's ready laugh--partly
at the dogs, partly at her own previous alarm--vexed kenelm's ear.  he
wished there had been a succession of ghosts, each more appalling than
the last.

the entertainment was over, and after a slight refreshment of cakes
and wine-and-water the party broke up; the children visitors went away
attended by servant-maids who had come for them.  mrs. cameron and
lily were to walk home on foot.

"it is a lovely night, mrs. cameron," said mr. emlyn, "and i will
attend you to your gate."

"permit me also," said kenelm.

"ay," said the vicar, "it is your own way to cromwell lodge."

the path led them through the churchyard as the nearest approach to
the brook-side.  the moonbeams shimmered through the yew-trees and
rested on the old tomb; playing, as it were, round the flowers which
lily's hand had that day dropped upon its stone.  she was walking
beside kenelm, the elder two a few paces in front.

"how silly i was," said she, "to be so frightened at the false ghost!
i don't think a real one would frighten me, at least if seen here, in
this loving moonlight, and on god's ground!"

"ghosts, were they permitted to appear except in a magic lantern,
could not harm the innocent.  and i wonder why the idea of their
apparition should always have been associated with such phantasies of
horror, especially by sinless children, who have the least reason to
dread them."

"oh, that is true," cried lily; "but even when we are grown up there
must be times in which we should so long to see a ghost, and feel what
a comfort, what a joy it would be."

"i understand you.  if some one very dear to us had vanished from our
life; if we felt the anguish of the separation so intensely as to
efface the thought that life, as you said so well, 'never dies;' well,
yes, then i can conceive that the mourner would yearn to have a
glimpse of the vanished one, were it but to ask the sole and only
question he could desire to put, 'art thou happy?  may i hope that we
shall meet again, never to part,--never?'"

kenelm's voice trembled as he spoke, tears stood in his eyes.  a
melancholy--vague, unaccountable, overpowering--passed across his
heart, as the shadow of some dark-winged bird passes over a quiet
stream.

"you have never yet felt this?" asked lily doubtingly, in a soft
voice, full of tender pity, stopping short and looking into his face.

"i?  no.  i have never yet lost one whom i so loved and so yearned to
see again.  i was but thinking that such losses may befall us all ere
we too vanish out of sight."

"lily!" called forth mrs. cameron, halting at the gate of the
burial-ground.

"yes, auntie?"

"mr. emlyn wants to know how far you have got in 'numa pompilius.'
come and answer for yourself."

"oh, those tiresome grown-up people!" whispered lily, petulantly, to
kenelm.  "i do like mr. emlyn; he is one of the very best of men.  but
still he is grown up, and his 'numa pompilius' is so stupid."

"my first french lesson-book.  no, it is not stupid.  read on.  it has
hints of the prettiest fairy tale i know, and of the fairy in especial
who bewitched my fancies as a boy."

by this time they had gained the gate of the burial-ground.

"what fairy tale? what fairy?" asked lily, speaking quickly.

"she was a fairy, though in heathen language she is called a
nymph,--egeria.  she was the link between men and gods to him she
loved; she belongs to the race of gods.  true, she, too, may vanish,
but she can never die."

"well, miss lily," said the vicar, "and how far in the book i lent
you,--'numa pompilius.'"

"ask me this day next week."

"i will; but mind you are to translate as you go on.  i must see the
translation."

"very well.  i will do my best," answered lily meekly.  lily now
walked by the vicar's side, and kenelm by mrs. cameron's, till they
reached grasmere.

"i will go on with you to the bridge, mr. chillingly," said the vicar,
when the ladies had disappeared within their garden.  "we had little
time to look over my books, and, by the by, i hope you at least took
the juvenal."

"no, mr. emlyn; who can quit your house with an inclination for
satire?  i must come some morning and select a volume from those works
which give pleasant views of life and bequeath favourable impressions
of mankind.  your wife, with whom i have had an interesting
conversation, upon the principles of aesthetical philosophy--"

"my wife!  charlotte!  she knows nothing about aesthetical
philosophy."

"she calls it by another name, but she understands it well enough to
illustrate the principles by example.  she tells me that labour and
duty are so taken up by you--


     'in den heitern regionen
       wo die reinen formen wohnen,'


that they become joy and beauty,--is it so?"

"i am sure that charlotte never said anything half so poetical.  but,
in plain words, the days pass with me very happily.  i should be
ungrateful if i were not happy.  heaven has bestowed on me so many
sources of love,--wife, children, books, and the calling which, when
one quits one's own threshold, carries love along with it into the
world beyond; a small world in itself,--only a parish,--but then my
calling links it with infinity."

"i see; it is from the sources of love that you draw the supplies for
happiness."

"surely; without love one may be good, but one could scarcely be
happy.  no one can dream of a heaven except as the abode of love.
what writer is it who says, 'how well the human heart was understood
by him who first called god by the name of father'?"

"i do not remember, but it is beautifully said.  you evidently do not
subscribe to the arguments in decimus roach's 'approach to the
angels.'"

"ah, mr. chillingly! your words teach me how lacerated a man's
happiness may be if he does not keep the claws of vanity closely
pared.  i actually feel a keen pang when you speak to me of that
eloquent panegyric on celibacy, ignorant that the only thing i ever
published which i fancied was not without esteem by intellectual
readers is a reply to 'the approach to the angels,'--a youthful book,
written in the first year of my marriage.  but it obtained success: i
have just revised the tenth edition of it."

"that is the book i will select from your library.  you will be
pleased to hear that mr. roach, whom i saw at oxford a few days ago,
recants his opinions, and, at the age of fifty, is about to be
married; he begs me to add, 'not for his own personal satisfaction.'"

"going to be married!--decimus roach!  i thought my reply would
convince him at last."

"i shall look to your reply to remove some lingering doubts in my own
mind."

"doubts in favour of celibacy?"

"well, if not for laymen, perhaps for a priesthood."

"the most forcible part of my reply is on that head: read it
attentively.  i think that, of all sections of mankind, the clergy are
those to whom, not only for their own sakes, but for the sake of the
community, marriage should be most commended.  why, sir," continued
the vicar, warming up into oratorical enthusiasm, "are you not aware
that there are no homes in england from which men who have served and
adorned their country have issued forth in such prodigal numbers as
those of the clergy of our church?  what other class can produce a
list so crowded with eminent names as we can boast in the sons we have
reared and sent forth into the world?  how many statesmen, soldiers,
sailors, lawyers, physicians, authors, men of science, have been the
sons of us village pastors?  naturally: for with us they receive
careful education; they acquire of necessity the simple tastes and
disciplined habits which lead to industry and perseverance; and, for
the most part, they carry with them throughout life a purer moral
code, a more systematic reverence for things and thoughts religious,
associated with their earliest images of affection and respect, than
can be expected from the sons of laymen whose parents are wholly
temporal and worldly. sir, i maintain that this is a cogent argument,
to be considered well by the nation, not only in favour of a married
clergy,--for, on that score, a million of roaches could not convert
public opinion in this country,--but in favour of the church, the
established church, which has been so fertile a nursery of illustrious
laymen; and i have often thought that one main and undetected cause of
the lower tone of morality, public and private, of the greater
corruption of manners, of the more prevalent scorn of religion which
we see, for instance, in a country so civilized as france, is, that
its clergy can train no sons to carry into the contests of earth the
steadfast belief in accountability to heaven."

"i thank you with a full heart," said kenelm.  "i shall ponder well
over all that you have so earnestly said.  i am already disposed to
give up all lingering crotchets as to a bachelor clergy; but, as a
layman, i fear that i shall never attain to the purified philanthropy
of mr. decimus roach, and, if ever i do marry, it will be very much
for my personal satisfaction."

mr. emlyn laughed good-humouredly, and, as they had now reached the
bridge, shook hands with kenelm, and walked homewards, along the
brook-side and through the burial-ground, with the alert step and the
uplifted head of a man who has joy in life and admits of no fear in
death.



chapter xiv.

for the next two weeks or so kenelm and lily met not indeed so often
as the reader might suppose, but still frequently; five times at mrs.
braefield's, once again at the vicarage, and twice when kenelm had
called at grasmere; and, being invited to stay to tea at one of those
visits, he stayed the whole evening.  kenelm was more and more
fascinated in proportion as he saw more and more of a creature so
exquisitely strange to his experience.  she was to him not only a
poem, but a poem in the sibylline books; enigmatical, perplexing
conjecture, and somehow or other mysteriously blending its interest
with visions of the future.

lily was indeed an enchanting combination of opposites rarely blended
into harmony.  her ignorance of much that girls know before they
number half her years was so relieved by candid, innocent simplicity,
so adorned by pretty fancies and sweet beliefs, and so contrasted and
lit up by gleams of a knowledge that the young ladies we call well
educated seldom exhibit,--knowledge derived from quick observation of
external nature, and impressionable susceptibility to its varying and
subtle beauties.  this knowledge had been perhaps first instilled, and
subsequently nourished, by such poetry as she had not only learned by
heart, but taken up as inseparable from the healthful circulation of
her thoughts; not the poetry of our own day,--most young ladies know
enough of that,--but selected fragments from the verse of old, most of
them from poets now little read by the young of either sex, poets dear
to spirits like coleridge or charles lamb,--none of them, however, so
dear to her as the solemn melodies of milton.  much of such poetry she
had never read in books: it had been taught her in childhood by her
guardian the painter.  and with all this imperfect, desultory culture,
there was such dainty refinement in her every look and gesture, and
such deep woman-tenderness of heart.  since kenelm had commended "numa
pompilius" to her study, she had taken very lovingly to that
old-fashioned romance, and was fond of talking to him about egeria as
of a creature who had really existed.

but what was the effect that he,--the first man of years correspondent
to her own with whom she had ever familiarly conversed,--what was the
effect that kenelm chillingly produced on the mind and the heart of
lily?

this was, after all, the question that puzzled him the most,--not
without reason: it might have puzzled the shrewdest bystander.  the
artless candour with which she manifested her liking to him was at
variance with the ordinary character of maiden love; it seemed more
the fondness of a child for a favourite brother.  and it was this
uncertainty that, in his own thoughts, justified kenelm for lingering
on, and believing that it was necessary to win, or at least to learn
more of, her secret heart before he could venture to disclose his own.
he did not flatter himself with the pleasing fear that he might be
endangering her happiness; it was only his own that was risked.  then,
in all those meetings, all those conversations to themselves, there
had passed none of the words which commit our destiny to the will of
another.  if in the man's eyes love would force its way, lily's frank,
innocent gaze chilled it back again to its inward cell.  joyously as
she would spring forward to meet him, there was no tell-tale blush on
her cheek, no self-betraying tremor in her clear, sweet-toned voice.
no; there had not yet been a moment when he could say to himself, "she
loves me."  often he said to himself, "she knows not yet what love
is."

in the intervals of time not passed in lily's society, kenelm would
take long rambles with mr. emlyn, or saunter into mrs. braefield's
drawing-room.  for the former he conceived a more cordial sentiment of
friendship than he entertained for any man of his own age,--a
friendship that admitted the noble elements of admiration and respect.

charles emlyn was one of those characters in which the colours appear
pale unless the light be brought very close to them, and then each
tint seems to change into a warmer and richer one.  the manner which,
at first, you would call merely gentle, becomes unaffectedly genial;
the mind you at first might term inert, though well-informed, you now
acknowledge to be full of disciplined vigour.  emlyn was not, however,
without his little amiable foibles; and it was, perhaps, these that
made him lovable.  he was a great believer in human goodness, and very
easily imposed upon by cunning appeals to "his well-known
benevolence."  he was disposed to overrate the excellence of all that
he once took to his heart.  he thought he had the best wife in the
world, the best children, the best servants, the best beehive, the
best pony, and the best house-dog.  his parish was the most virtuous,
his church the most picturesque, his vicarage the prettiest,
certainly, in the whole shire,--perhaps, in the whole kingdom.
probably it was this philosophy of optimism which contributed to lift
him into the serene realm of aesthetic joy.

he was not without his dislikes as well as likings.  though a liberal
churchman towards protestant dissenters, he cherished the /odium
theologicum/ for all that savoured of popery.  perhaps there was
another cause for this besides the purely theological one.  early in
life a young sister of his had been, to use his phrase, "secretly
entrapped" into conversion to the roman catholic faith, and had since
entered a convent.  his affections had been deeply wounded by this
loss to the range of them.  mr. emlyn had also his little infirmities
of self-esteem rather than of vanity.  though he had seen very little
of any world beyond that of his parish, he piqued himself on his
knowledge of human nature and of practical affairs in general.
certainly no man had read more about them, especially in the books of
the ancient classics.  perhaps it was owing to this that he so little
understood lily,--a character to which the ancient classics afforded
no counterpart nor clue; and perhaps it was this also that made lily
think him "so terribly grown up."  thus, despite his mild good-nature,
she did not get on very well with him.

the society of this amiable scholar pleased kenelm the more, because
the scholar evidently had not the remotest idea that kenelm's sojourn
at cromwell lodge was influenced by the vicinity to grasmere.  mr.
emlyn was sure that he knew human nature, and practical affairs in
general, too well to suppose that the heir to a rich baronet could
dream of taking for wife a girl without fortune or rank, the orphan
ward of a low-born artist only just struggling into reputation; or,
indeed, that a cambridge prizeman, who had evidently read much on
grave and dry subjects, and who had no less evidently seen a great
deal of polished society, could find any other attraction in a very
imperfectly-educated girl, who tamed butterflies and knew no more than
they did of fashionable life, than mr. emlyn himself felt in the
presence of a pretty wayward innocent child, the companion and friend
of his clemmy.

mrs. braefield was more discerning; but she had a good deal of tact,
and did not as yet scare kenelm away from her house by letting him see
how much she had discerned.  she would not even tell her husband, who,
absent from the place on most mornings, was too absorbed in the cares
of his own business to interest himself much in the affairs of others.

now elsie, being still of a romantic turn of mind, had taken it into
her head that lily mordaunt, if not actually the princess to be found
in poetic dramas whose rank was for a while kept concealed, was yet
one of the higher-born daughters of the ancient race whose name she
bore, and in that respect no derogatory alliance for kenelm
chillingly.  a conclusion she had arrived at from no better evidence
than the well-bred appearance and manners of the aunt, and the
exquisite delicacy of the niece's form and features, with the
undefinable air of distinction which accompanied even her most
careless and sportive moments.  but mrs. braefield also had the wit to
discover that, under the infantine ways and phantasies of this almost
self-taught girl, there lay, as yet undeveloped, the elements of a
beautiful womanhood.  so that altogether, from the very day she first
re-encountered kenelm, elsie's thought had been that lily was the wife
to suit him.  once conceiving that idea, her natural strength of will
made her resolve on giving all facilities to carry it out silently and
unobtrusively, and therefore skilfully.

"i am so glad to think," she said one day, when kenelm had joined her
walk through the pleasant shrubberies in her garden ground, "that you
have made such friends with mr. emlyn.  though all hereabouts like him
so much for his goodness, there are few who can appreciate his
learning.  to you it must be a surprise as well as pleasure to find,
in this quiet humdrum place, a companion so clever and well-informed:
it compensates for your disappointment in discovering that our brook
yields such bad sport."

"don't disparage the brook; it yields the pleasantest banks on which
to lie down under old pollard oaks at noon, or over which to saunter
at morn and eve.  where those charms are absent even a salmon could
not please.  yes; i rejoice to have made friends with mr. emlyn.  i
have learned a great deal from him, and am often asking myself whether
i shall ever make peace with my conscience by putting what i have
learned into practice."

"may i ask what special branch of learning is that?"

"i scarcely know how to define it.  suppose we call it
'worth-whileism.' among the new ideas which i was recommended to study
as those that must govern my generation, the not-worth-while idea
holds a very high rank; and being myself naturally of calm and equable
constitution, that new idea made the basis of my philosophical system.
but since i have become intimate with charles emlyn i think there is a
great deal to be said in favour of worth-whileism, old idea though it
be.  i see a man who, with very commonplace materials for interest or
amusement at his command, continues to be always interested or
generally amused; i ask myself why and how?  and it seems to me as if
the cause started from fixed beliefs which settle his relations with
god and man, and that settlement he will not allow any speculations to
disturb.  be those beliefs questionable or not by others, at least
they are such as cannot displease a deity, and cannot fail to be
kindly and useful to fellow-mortals.  then he plants these beliefs on
the soil of a happy and genial home, which tends to confirm and
strengthen and call them into daily practice; and when he goes forth
from home, even to the farthest verge of the circle that surrounds it,
he carries with him the home influences of kindliness and use.
possibly my line of life may be drawn to the verge of a wider circle
than his; but so much the better for interest and amusement, if it can
be drawn from the same centre; namely, fixed beliefs daily warmed into
vital action in the sunshine of a congenial home."

mrs. braefield listened to this speech with pleased attention, and as
it came to its close, the name of lily trembled on her tongue, for she
divined that when he spoke of home lily was in his thoughts; but she
checked the impulse, and replied by a generalized platitude.

"certainly the first thing in life is to secure a happy and congenial
home.  it must be a terrible trial for the best of us if we marry
without love."

"terrible, indeed, if the one loves and the other does not."

"that can scarcely be your case, mr. chillingly, for i am sure you
could not marry where you did not love; and do not think i flatter you
when i say that a man far less gifted than you can scarcely fail to be
loved by the woman he wooes and wins."

kenelm, in this respect one of the modestest of human beings, shook
his head doubtingly, and was about to reply in self-disparagement,
when, lifting his eyes and looking round, he halted mute and still as
if rooted to the spot.  they had entered the trellised circle through
the roses of which he had first caught sight of the young face that
had haunted him ever since.

"ah!" he said abruptly; "i cannot stay longer here, dreaming away the
work-day hours in a fairy ring.  i am going to town to-day by the next
train."

"yoa are coming back?"

"of course,--this evening.  i left no address at my lodgings in
london.  there must be a large accumulation of letters; some, no
doubt, from my father and mother.  i am only going for them.  good-by.
how kindly you have listened to me!"

"shall we fix a day next week for seeing the remains of the old roman
villa?  i will ask mrs. cameron and her niece to be of the party."

"any day you please," said kenelm joyfully.



chapter xv.

kenelm did indeed find a huge pile of letters and notes on reaching
his forsaken apartment in mayfair; many of them merely invitations for
days long past, none of them of interest except two from sir peter,
three from his mother, and one from tom bowles.

sir peter's were short.  in the first he gently scolded kenelm for
going away without communicating any address; and stated the
acquaintance he had formed with gordon, the favourable impression that
young gentleman had made on him, the transfer of the l20,000 and the
invitation given to gordon, the traverses, and lady glenalvon.  the
second, dated much later, noted the arrival of his invited guests,
dwelt with warmth unusual to sir peter on the attractions of cecilia,
and took occasion to refer, not the less emphatically because as it
were incidentally, to the sacred promise which kenelm had given him
never to propose to a young lady until the case had been submitted to
the examination and received the consent of sir peter.  "come to
exmundham, and if i do not give my consent to propose to cecilia
travers hold me a tyrant and rebel."

lady chillingly's letters were much longer.  they dwelt more
complainingly on his persistence in eccentric habits; so exceedingly
unlike other people, quitting london at the very height of the season,
going without even a servant nobody knew where: she did not wish to
wound his feelings; but still those were not the ways natural to a
young gentleman of station.  if he had no respect for himself, he
ought to have some consideration for his parents, especially his poor
mother.  she then proceeded to comment on the elegant manners of
leopold travers, and the good sense and pleasant conversation of
chillingly gordon, a young man of whom any mother might be proud.
from that subject she diverged to mildly querulous references to
family matters.  parson john had expressed himself very rudely to mr.
chillingly gordon upon some book by a foreigner,--comte or count, or
some such name,--on which, so far as she could pretend to judge, mr.
gordon had uttered some very benevolent sentiments about humanity,
which, in the most insolent manner, parson john had denounced as an
attack on religion.  but really parson john was too high church for
her.  having thus disposed of parson john, she indulged some ladylike
wailings on the singular costume of the three miss chillinglys.  they
had been asked by sir peter, unknown to her--so like him--to meet
their guests; to meet lady glenalvon and miss travers, whose dress was
so perfect (here she described their dress); and they came in
pea-green with pelerines of mock blonde, and miss sally with corkscrew
ringlets and a wreath of jessamine, "which no girl after eighteen
would venture to wear."

"but, my dear," added her ladyship, "your poor father's family are
certainly great oddities.  i have more to put up with than any one
knows.  i do my best to carry it off.  i know my duties, and will do
them."

family grievances thus duly recorded and lamented, lady chillingly
returned to her guests.

evidently unconscious of her husband's designs on cecilia, she
dismissed her briefly: "a very handsome young lady, though rather too
blonde for her taste, and certainly with an air /distingue/."  lastly,
she enlarged on the extreme pleasure she felt on meeting again the
friend of her youth, lady glenalvon.

"not at all spoilt by the education of the great world, which, alas!
obedient to the duties of wife and mother, however little my
sacrifices are appreciated, i have long since relinquished.  lady
glenalvon suggests turning that hideous old moat into a fernery,--a
great improvement.  of course your poor father makes objections."

tom's letter was written on black-edged paper, and ran thus:--


dear sir,--since i had the honour to see you in london i have had a
sad loss: my poor uncle is no more.  he died very suddenly after a
hearty supper.  one doctor says it was apoplexy, another valvular
disease of the heart.  he has left me his heir, after providing for
his sister: no one had an idea that he had saved so much money.  i am
quite a rich man now.  and i shall leave the veterinary business,
which of late--since i took to reading, as you kindly advised--is not
much to my liking  the principal corn-merchant here has offered to
take me into partnership; and, from what i can see, it will be a very
good thing and a great rise in life.  but, sir, i can't settle to it
at present; i can't settle, as i would wish to anything.  i know you
will not laugh at me when i say i have a strange longing to travel for
a while.  i have been reading books of travels, and they get into my
head more than any other books.  but i don't think i could leave the
country with a contented heart till i have had just another look at
you know whom,--just to see her, and know she is happy.  i am sure i
could shake hands with will and kiss her little one without a wrong
thought.  what do you say to that, dear sir?  you promised to write to
me about her.  but i have not heard from you.  susey, the little girl
with the flower-ball, has had a loss too: the poor old man she lived
with died within a few days of my dear uncle's decease.  mother moved
here, as i think you know, when the forge at graveleigh was sold; and
she is going to take susey to live with her.  she is quite fond of
susey.  pray let me hear from you soon; and do, dear sir, give me your
advice about travelling--and about her.  you see i should like her to
think of me more kindly when i am in distant parts.

     i remain, dear sir,

          your grateful servant,

               t.  bowles.

p.s.--miss travers has sent me will's last remittance.  there is very
little owed me now; so they must be thriving.  i hope she is not
overworked.


on returning by the train that evening, kenelm went to the house of
will somers.  the shop was already closed, but he was admitted by a
trusty servant-maid to the parlour, where he found them all at supper,
except indeed the baby, who had long since retired to the cradle, and
the cradle had been removed upstairs.  will and jessie were very proud
when kenelm invited himself to share their repast, which, though
simple, was by no means a bad one.  when the meal was over and the
supper things removed, kenelm drew his chair near to the glass door
which led into a little garden very neatly kept--for it was will's
pride to attend to it before he sat down to his more professional
work.  the door was open, and admitted the coolness of the starlit air
and the fragrance of the sleeping flowers.

"you have a pleasant home here, mrs. somers."

"we have, indeed, and know how to bless him we owe it to."

"i am rejoiced to think that.  how often when god designs a special
kindness to us he puts the kindness into the heart of a
fellow-man,--perhaps the last fellow-man we should have thought of;
but in blessing him we thank god who inspired him.  now, my dear
friends, i know that you all three suspect me of being the agent whom
god chose for his benefits.  you fancy that it was from me came the
loan which enabled you to leave graveleigh and settle here.  you are
mistaken,--you look incredulous."

"it could not be the squire," exclaimed jessie.  "miss travers assured
me that it was neither he nor herself.  oh, it must be you, sir.  i
beg pardon, but who else could it be?"

"your husband shall guess.  suppose, will, that you had behaved ill to
some one who was nevertheless dear to you, and on thinking over it
afterwards felt very sorry and much ashamed of yourself, and suppose
that later you had the opportunity and the power to render a service
to that person, do you think you would do it?"

"i should be a bad man if i did not."

"bravo!  and supposing that when the person you thus served came to
know it was you who rendered the service, he did not feel thankful, he
did not think it handsome of you, thus to repair any little harm he
might have done you before, but became churlish and sore and
cross-grained, and with a wretched false pride said that because he
had offended you once he resented your taking the liberty of
befriending him now, would you not think that person an ungrateful
fellow; ungrateful not only to you his fellow-man,--that is of less
moment,--but ungrateful to the god who put it into your heart to be
his human agent in the benefit received?"

"well, sir, yes, certainly," said will, with all the superior
refinement of his intellect to that of jessie, unaware of what kenelm
was driving at; while jessie, pressing her hands tightly together,
turned pale, and with a frightened hurried glance towards will's face,
answered, impulsively,--

"oh, mr. chillingly, i hope you are not thinking, not speaking, of mr.
bowles?"

"whom else should i think or speak of?"

will rose nervously from his chair, all his features writhing.

"sir, sir, this is a bitter blow,--very bitter, very."

jessie rushed to will, flung her arms round him and sobbed.  kenelm
turned quietly to old mrs. somers, who had suspended the work on which
since supper she had been employed, knitting socks for the baby,--

"my dear mrs. somers, what is the good of being a grandmother and
knitting socks for baby grandchildren, if you cannot assure those
silly children of yours that they are too happy in each other to
harbour any resentment against a man who would have parted them, and
now repents?"

somewhat to kenelm's admiration, i dare not say surprise, old mrs.
somers, thus appealed to, rose from her seat, and, with a dignity of
thought or of feeling no one could have anticipated from the quiet
peasant woman, approached the wedded pair, lifted jessie's face with
one hand, laid the other on will's head, and said, "if you don't long
to see mr. bowles again and say 'the lord bless you, sir!' you don't
deserve the lord's blessing upon you."  therewith she went back to her
seat, and resumed her knitting.

"thank heaven, we have paid back the best part of the loan," said
will, in very agitated tones, "and i think, with a little pinching,
jessie, and with selling off some of the stock, we might pay the rest;
and then,"--and then he turned to kenelm,--"and then, sir, we will"
(here a gulp) "thank mr. bowles."

"this don't satisfy me at all, will," answered kenelm; "and since i
helped to bring you two together, i claim the right to say i would
never have done so could i have guessed you could have trusted your
wife so little as to allow a remembrance of mr. bowles to be a thought
of pain.  you did not feel humiliated when you imagined that it was to
me you owed some moneys which you have been honestly paying off.
well, then, i will lend you whatever trifle remains to discharge your
whole debts to mr. bowles, so that you may sooner be able to say to
him, 'thank you.'  but between you and me, will, i think you will be a
finer fellow and a manlier fellow if you decline to borrow that trifle
of me; if you feel you would rather say 'thank you' to mr. bowles,
without the silly notion that when you have paid him his money you owe
him nothing for his kindness."

will looked away irresolutely.  kenelm went on: "i have received a
letter from mr. bowles to-day.  he has come into a fortune, and thinks
of going abroad for a time; but before he goes, he says he should like
to shake hands with will, and be assured by jessie that all his old
rudeness is forgiven.  he had no notion that i should blab about the
loan: he wished that to remain always a secret.  but between friends
there need be no secrets.  what say you, will?  as head of this
household, shall mr. bowles be welcomed here as a friend or not?"

"kindly welcome," said old mrs. somers, looking up from the socks.

"sir," said will, with sudden energy, "look here; you have never been
in love, i dare say.  if you had, you would not be so hard on me.  mr.
bowles was in love with my wife there.  mr. bowles is a very fine man,
and i am a cripple."

"oh, will!  will!" cried jessie.

"but i trust my wife with my whole heart and soul; and, now that the
first pang is over, mr. bowles shall be, as mother says, kindly
welcome,--heartily welcome."

"shake hands.  now you speak like a man, will.  i hope to bring bowles
here to supper before many days are over."

and that night kenelm wrote to mr. bowles:


my dear tom,--come and spend a few days with me at cromwell lodge,
moleswich.  mr. and mrs. somers wish much to see and to thank you.  i
could not remain forever degraded in order to gratify your whim.  they
would have it that i bought their shop, etc., and i was forced in
self-defence to say who it was.  more on this and on travels when you
come.

     your true friend,

          k. c.



chapter xvi.

mrs. cameron was seated alone in her pretty drawing-room, with a book
lying open, but unheeded, on her lap.  she was looking away from its
pages, seemingly into the garden without, but rather into empty space.

to a very acute and practised observer, there was in her countenance
an expression which baffled the common eye.

to the common eye it was simply vacant; the expression of a quiet,
humdrum woman, who might have been thinking of some quiet humdrum
household detail,--found that too much for her, and was now not
thinking at all.

but to the true observer, there were in that face indications of a
troubled past, still haunted with ghosts never to be laid at
rest,--indications, too, of a character in herself that had undergone
some revolutionary change; it had not always been the character of a
woman quiet and humdrum.  the delicate outlines of the lip and nostril
evinced sensibility, and the deep and downward curve of it bespoke
habitual sadness.  the softness of the look into space did not tell of
a vacant mind, but rather of a mind subdued and over-burdened by the
weight of a secret sorrow.  there was also about her whole presence,
in the very quiet which made her prevalent external characteristic,
the evidence of manners formed in a high-bred society,--the society in
which quiet is connected with dignity and grace.  the poor understood
this better than her rich acquaintances at moleswich, when they said,
"mrs. cameron was every inch a lady."  to judge by her features she
must once have been pretty, not a showy prettiness, but decidedly
pretty.  now, as the features were small, all prettiness had faded
away in cold gray colourings, and a sort of tamed and slumbering
timidity of aspect.  she was not only not demonstrative, but must have
imposed on herself as a duty the suppression of demonstration.  who
could look at the formation of those lips, and not see that they
belonged to the nervous, quick, demonstrative temperament?  and yet,
observing her again more closely, that suppression of the
constitutional tendency to candid betrayal of emotion would the more
enlist our curiosity or interest; because, if physiognomy and
phrenology have any truth in them, there was little strength in her
character.  in the womanly yieldingness of the short curved upper lip,
the pleading timidity of the regard, the disproportionate but elegant
slenderness of the head between the ear and the neck, there were the
tokens of one who cannot resist the will, perhaps the whim, of another
whom she either loves or trusts.

the book open on her lap is a serious book on the doctrine of grace,
written by a popular clergyman of what is termed "the low church."
she seldom read any but serious books, except where such care as she
gave to lily's education compelled her to read "outlines of history
and geography," or the elementary french books used in seminaries for
young ladies.  yet if any one had decoyed mrs. cameron into familiar
conversation, he would have discovered that she must early have
received the education given to young ladies of station.  she could
speak and write french and italian as a native.  she had read, and
still remembered, such classic authors in either language as are
conceded to the use of pupils by the well-regulated taste of orthodox
governesses.  she had a knowledge of botany, such as botany was taught
twenty years ago.  i am not sure that, if her memory had been fairly
aroused, she might not have come out strong in divinity and political
economy, as expounded by the popular manuals of mrs. marcet.  in
short, you could see in her a thoroughbred english lady, who had been
taught in a generation before lily's, and immeasurably superior in
culture to the ordinary run of english young ladies taught nowadays.
so, in what after all are very minor accomplishments,--now made major
accomplishments,--such as music, it was impossible that a connoisseur
should hear her play on the piano without remarking, "that woman has
had the best masters of her time."  she could only play pieces that
belonged to her generation.  she had learned nothing since.  in short,
the whole intellectual culture had come to a dead stop long years ago,
perhaps before lily was born.

now, while she is gazing into space mrs. braefield is announced.  mrs.
cameron does not start from revery.  she never starts.  but she makes
a weary movement of annoyance, resettles herself, and lays the serious
book on the sofa table.  elsie enters, young, radiant, dressed in all
the perfection of the fashion, that is, as ungracefully as in the eyes
of an artist any gentlewoman can be; but rich merchants who are proud
of their wives so insist, and their wives, in that respect,
submissively obey them.

the ladies interchange customary salutations, enter into the customary
preliminaries of talk, and after a pause elsie begins in earnest.

"but sha'n't i see lily?  where is she?"

"i fear she has gone into the town.  a poor little boy, who did our
errands, has met with an accident,--fallen from a cherry-tree."

"which he was robbing?"

"probably."

"and lily has gone to lecture him?"

"i don't know as to that; but he is much hurt, and lily has gone to
see what is the matter with him."

mrs. braefield, in her frank outspoken way,--"i don't take much to
girls of lily's age in general, though i am passionately fond of
children.  you know how i do take to lily; perhaps because she is so
like a child.  but she must be an anxious charge to you."

mrs. cameron replied by an anxious "no; she is still a child, a very
good one; why should i be anxious?"

mrs. braefield, impulsively,--"why, your child must now be eighteen."

mrs. cameron,--"eighteen--is it possible!  how time flies! though in a
life so monotonous as mine, time does not seem to fly, it slips on
like the lapse of water.  let me think,--eighteen?  no, she is but
seventeen,--seventeen last may."

mrs. braefield,--"seventeen!  a very anxious age for a girl; an age in
which dolls cease and lovers begin."

mrs. cameron, not so languidly, but still quietly,--"lily never cared
much for dolls,--never much for lifeless pets; and as to lovers, she
does not dream of them."

mrs. braefield, briskly,--"there is no age after six in which girls do
not dream of lovers.  and here another question arises.  when a girl
so lovely as lily is eighteen next birthday, may not a lover dream of
her?"

mrs. cameron, with that wintry cold tranquillity of manner, which
implies that in putting such questions an interrogator is taking a
liberty,--"as no lover has appeared, i cannot trouble myself about his
dreams."

said elsie inly to herself, "this is the stupidest woman i ever met!"
and aloud to mrs. cameron,--"do you not think that your neighbour, mr.
chillingly, is a very fine young man?"

"i suppose he would be generally considered so.  he is very tall."

"a handsome face?"

"handsome, is it?  i dare say."

"what does lily say?"

"about what?"

"about mr. chillingly.  does she not think him handsome?"

"i never asked her."

"my dear mrs. cameron, would it not be a very pretty match for lily?
the chillinglys are among the oldest families in burke's 'landed
gentry,' and i believe his father, sir peter, has a considerable
property."

for the first time in this conversation mrs. cameron betrayed emotion.
a sudden flush overspread her countenance, and then left it paler than
before.  after a pause she recovered her accustomed composure, and
replied, rudely,--

"it would be no friend to lily who could put such notions into her
head; and there is no reason to suppose that they have entered into
mr. chillingly's."

"would you be sorry if they did?  surely you would like your niece to
marry well, and there are few chances of her doing so at moleswich."

"pardon me, mrs. braefield, but the question of lily's marriage i have
never discussed, even with her guardian.  nor, considering the
childlike nature of her tastes and habits, rather than the years she
has numbered, can i think the time has yet come for discussing it at
all."

elsie, thus rebuked, changed the subject to some newspaper topic which
interested the public mind at the moment and very soon rose to depart.
mrs. cameron detained the hand that her visitor held out, and said in
low tones, which, though embarrassed, were evidently earnest, "my dear
mrs. braefield, let me trust to your good sense and the affection with
which you have honoured my niece not to incur the risk of unsettling
her mind by a hint of the ambitious projects for her future on which
you have spoken to me.  it is extremely improbable that a young man of
mr. chillingly's expectations would entertain any serious thoughts of
marrying out of his own sphere of life, and--"

"stop, mrs. cameron, i must interrupt you.  lily's personal
attractions and grace of manner would adorn any station; and have i
not rightly understood you to say that though her guardian, mr.
melville, is, as we all know, a man who has risen above the rank of
his parents, your niece, miss mordaunt, is like yourself, by birth a
gentlewoman?"

"yes, by birth a gentlewoman," said mrs. cameron, raising her head
with a sudden pride.  but she added, with as sudden a change to a sort
of freezing humility, "what does that matter?  a girl without fortune,
without connection, brought up in this little cottage, the ward of a
professional artist, who was the son of a city clerk, to whom she owes
even the home she has found, is not in the same sphere of life as mr.
chillingly, and his parents could not approve of such an alliance for
him.  it would be most cruel to her, if you were to change the
innocent pleasure she may take in the conversation of a clever and
well-informed stranger into the troubled interest which, since you
remind me of her age, a girl even so childlike and beautiful as lily
might conceive in one represented to her as the possible partner of
her life.  don't commit that cruelty; don't--don't, i implore you!"

"trust me," cried the warm-hearted elsie, with tears rushing to her
eyes.  "what you say so sensibly, so nobly, never struck me before.  i
do not know much of the world,--knew nothing of it till i
married,--and being very fond of lily, and having a strong regard for
mr. chillingly, i fancied i could not serve both better
than--than--but i see now; he is very young, very peculiar; his
parents might object, not to lily herself, but to the circumstances
you name.  and you would not wish her to enter any family where she
was not as cordially welcomed as she deserves to be.  i am glad to
have had this talk with you.  happily, i have done no mischief as yet.
i will do none.  i had come to propose an excursion to the remains of
the roman villa, some miles off, and to invite you and mr. chillingly.
i will no longer try to bring him and lily together."

"thank you.  but you still misconstrue me.  i do not think that lily
cares half so much for mr. chillingly as she does for a new butterfly.
i do not fear their coming together, as you call it, in the light in
which she now regards him, and in which, from all i observe, he
regards her.  my only fear is that a hint might lead her to regard him
in another way, and that way impossible."

elsie left the house extremely bewildered, and with a profound
contempt for mrs. cameron's knowledge of what may happen to two young
persons "brought together."



chapter xvii.

now, on that very day, and about the same hour in which the
conversation just recorded between elsie and mrs. cameron took place,
kenelm, in his solitary noonday wanderings, entered the burial-ground
in which lily had some short time before surprised him.  and there he
found her, standing beside the flower border which she had placed
round the grave of the child whom she had tended and nursed in vain.

the day was cloudless and sunless; one of those days that so often
instil a sentiment of melancholy into the heart of an english summer.

"you come here too often, miss mordaunt," said kenelm, very softly, as
he approached.

lily turned her face to him, without any start of surprise, with no
brightening change in its pensive expression,--an expression rare to
the mobile play of her features.

"not too often.  i promised to come as often as i could; and, as i
told you before, i have never broken a promise yet."

kenelm made no answer.  presently the girl turned from the spot, and
kenelm followed her silently till she halted before the old tombstone
with its effaced inscription.

"see," she said, with a faint smile, "i have put fresh flowers there.
since the day we met in this churchyard, i have thought so much of
that tomb, so neglected, so forgotten, and--" she paused a moment, and
went on abruptly, "do you not often find that you are much too--what
is the word? ah! too egotistical, considering and pondering and
dreaming greatly too much about yourself?"

"yes, you are right there; though, till you so accused me, my
conscience did not detect it."

"and don't you find that you escape from being so haunted by the
thought of yourself, when you think of the dead? they can never have
any share in your existence /here/.  when you say, 'i shall do this or
that to-day;' when you dream, 'i may be this or that to-morrow,' you
are thinking and dreaming, all by yourself, for yourself.  but you are
out of yourself, beyond yourself, when you think and dream of the
dead, who can have nothing to do with your to-day or your to-morrow."

as we all know, kenelm chillingly made it one of the rules of his life
never to be taken by surprise.  but when the speech i have written
down came from the lips of that tamer of butterflies, he was so
startled that all it occurred to him to say, after a long pause,
was,--

"the dead are the past; and with the past rests all in the present or
the future that can take us out of our natural selves.  the past
decides our present.  by the past we divine our future.  history,
poetry, science, the welfare of states, the advancement of
individuals, are all connected with tombstones of which inscriptions
are effaced.  you are right to honour the mouldered tombstones with
fresh flowers.  it is only in the companionship of the dead that one
ceases to be an egotist."

if the imperfectly educated lily had been above the quick
comprehension of the academical kenelm in her speech, so kenelm was
now above the comprehension of lily.  she, too, paused before she
replied,--

"if i knew you better, i think i could understand you better.  i wish
you knew lion.  i should like to hear you talk with him."

while thus conversing, they had left the burial-ground, and were in
the pathway trodden by the common wayfarer.

lily resumed,--"yes, i should like to hear you talk with lion."

"you mean your guardian, mr. melville?"

"yes, you know that."

"and why should you like to hear me talk to him?"

"because there are some things in which i doubt if he was altogether
right, and i would ask you to express my doubts to him; you would,
would you not?"

"but why can you not express them yourself to your guardian; are you
afraid of him?"

"afraid, no indeed!  but--ah, how many people there are coming this
way!  there is some tiresome public meeting in the town to-day.  let
us take the ferry: the other side of the stream is much pleasanter; we
shall have it more to ourselves."

turning aside to the right while she thus spoke, lily descended a
gradual slope to the margin of the stream, on which they found an old
man dozily reclined in his ferry-boat.

as, seated side by side, they were slowly borne over the still waters
under a sunless sky, kenelm would have renewed the subject which his
companion had begun, but she shook her head, with a significant glance
at the ferryman.  evidently what she had to say was too confidential
to admit of a listener, not that the old ferryman seemed likely to
take the trouble of listening to any talk that was not addressed to
him.  lily soon did address her talk to him, "so, brown, the cow has
quite recovered."

"yes, miss, thanks to you, and god bless you.  to think of your
beating the old witch like that!"

"'tis not i who beat the witch, brown; 'tis the fairy.  fairies, you
know, are much more powerful than witches."

"so i find, miss."

lily here turned to kenelm; "mr. brown has a very nice milch-cow that
was suddenly taken very ill, and both he and his wife were convinced
that the cow was bewitched."

"of course it were, that stands to reason.  did not mother wright tell
my old woman that she would repent of selling milk, and abuse her
dreadful; and was not the cow taken with shivers that very night?"

"gently, brown.  mother wright did not say that your wife would repent
of selling milk, but of putting water into it."

"and how did she know that, if she was not a witch?  we have the best
of customers among the gentlefolks, and never any one that
complained."

"and," answered lily to kenelm, unheeding this last observation, which
was made in a sullen manner, "brown had a horrid notion of enticing
mother wright into his ferry-boat and throwing her into the water, in
order to break the spell upon the cow.  but i consulted the fairies,
and gave him a fairy charm to tie round the cow's neck.  and the cow
is quite well now, you see.  so, brown, there was no necessity to
throw mother wright into the water, because she said you put some of
it into the milk.  but," she added, as the boat now touched the
opposite bank, "shall i tell you, brown, what the fairies said to me
this morning?"

"do, miss."

"it was this: if brown's cow yields milk without any water in it, and
if water gets into it when the milk is sold, we, the fairies, will
pinch mr. brown black and blue; and when brown has his next fit of
rheumatics he must not look to the fairies to charm it away."

herewith lily dropped a silver groat into brown's hand, and sprang
lightly ashore, followed by kenelm.

"you have quite converted him, not only as to the existence, but as to
the beneficial power of fairies," said kenelm.

"ah," answered lily very gravely, "ah, but would it not be nice if
there were fairies still? good fairies, and one could get at them?
tell them all that troubles and puzzles us, and win from them charms
against the witchcraft we practise on ourselves?"

"i doubt if it would be good for us to rely on such supernatural
counsellors.  our own souls are so boundless that the more we explore
them the more we shall find worlds spreading upon worlds into
infinities; and among the worlds is fairyland."  he added, inly to
himself, "am i not in fairyland now?"

"hush!" whispered lily.  "don't speak more yet awhile.  i am thinking
over what you have just said, and trying to understand it."

thus walking silently they gained the little summer-house which
tradition dedicated to the memory of izaak walton.  lily entered it
and seated herself; kenelm took his place beside her.  it was a small
octagon building which, judging by its architecture, might have been
built in the troubled reign of charles i.; the walls plastered within
were thickly covered with names and dates, and inscriptions in praise
of angling, in tribute to izaak, or with quotations from his books.
on the opposite side they could see the lawn of grasmere, with its
great willows dipping into the water.  the stillness of the place,
with its associations of the angler's still life, were in harmony with
the quiet day, its breezeless air, and cloud-vested sky.

"you were to tell me your doubts in connection with your guardian,
doubts if he were right in something which you left unexplained, which
you could not yourself explain to him."

lily started as from thoughts alien to the subject thus reintroduced.
"yes, i cannot mention my doubts to him because they relate to me, and
he is so good.  i owe him so much that i could not bear to vex him by
a word that might seem like reproach or complaint.  you remember,"
here she drew nearer to him; and with that ingenuous confiding look
and movement which had, not unfrequently, enraptured him at the
moment, and saddened him on reflection,--too ingenuous, too confiding,
for the sentiment with which he yearned to inspire her,--she turned
towards him her frank untimorous eyes, and laid her hand on his arm:
"you remember that i said in the burial-ground how much i felt that
one is constantly thinking too much of one's self.  that must be
wrong.  in talking to you only about myself i know i am wrong, but i
cannot help it: i must do so.  do not think ill of me for it. you see
i have not been brought up like other girls.  was my guardian right in
that?  perhaps if he had insisted upon not letting me have my own
wilful way, if he had made me read the books which mr. and mrs. emlyn
wanted to force on me, instead of the poems and fairy tales which he
gave me, i should have had so much more to think of that i should have
thought less of myself.  you said that the dead were the past; one
forgets one's self when one thinks of the dead.  if i had read more of
the past, had more subjects of interest in the dead whose history it
tells, surely i should be less shut up, as it were, in my own small,
selfish heart?  it is only very lately i have thought of this, only
very lately that i have felt sorrow and shame in the thought that i am
so ignorant of what other girls know, even little clemmy.  and i dare
not say this to lion when i see him next, lest he should blame
himself, when he only meant to be kind, and used to say, 'i don't want
fairy to be learned, it is enough for me to think she is happy.'  and
oh, i was so happy, till--till of late!"

"because till of late you only knew yourself as a child.  but, now
that you feel the desire of knowledge, childhood is vanishing.  do not
vex yourself.  with the mind which nature has bestowed on you, such
learning as may fit you to converse with those dreaded 'grown-up
folks' will come to you very easily and quickly.  you will acquire
more in a month now than you would have acquired in a year when you
were a child, and task-work was loathed, not courted.  your aunt is
evidently well instructed, and if i might venture to talk to her about
the choice of books--"

"no, don't do that.  lion would not like it."

"your guardian would not like you to have the education common to
other young ladies?"

"lion forbade my aunt to teach me much that i rather wished to learn.
she wanted to do so, but she has given it up at his wish.  she only
now teases me with those horrid french verbs, and that i know is a
mere make-belief.  of course on sunday it is different; then i must
not read anything but the bible and sermons.  i don't care so much for
the sermons as i ought, but i could read the bible all day, every
week-day as well as sunday; and it is from the bible that i learn that
i ought to think less about myself."

kenelm involuntarily pressed the little hand that lay so innocently on
his arm.

"do you know the difference between one kind of poetry and another?"
asked lily, abruptly.

"i am not sure.  i ought to know when one kind is good and another
kind is bad.  but in that respect i find many people, especially
professed critics, who prefer the poetry which i call bad to the
poetry i think good."

"the difference between one kind of poetry and another, supposing them
both to be good," said lily, positively, and with an air of triumph,
"is this,--i know, for lion explained it to me,--in one kind of poetry
the writer throws himself entirely out of his existence, he puts
himself into other existences quite strange to his own.  he may be a
very good man, and he writes his best poetry about very wicked men: he
would not hurt a fly, but he delights in describing murderers.  but in
the other kind of poetry the writer does not put himself into other
existences, he expresses his own joys and sorrows, his own individual
heart and mind.  if he could not hurt a fly, he certainly could not
make himself at home in the cruel heart of a murderer.  there, mr.
chillingly, that is the difference between one kind of poetry and
another."

"very true," said kenelm, amused by the girl's critical definitions.
"the difference between dramatic poetry and lyrical.  but may i ask
what that definition has to do with the subject into which you so
suddenly introduced it?"

"much; for when lion was explaining this to my aunt, he said, 'a
perfect woman is a poem; but she can never be a poem of the one kind,
never can make herself at home in the hearts with which she has no
connection, never feel any sympathy with crime and evil; she must be a
poem of the other kind, weaving out poetry from her own thoughts and
fancies.' and, turning to me, he said, smiling, 'that is the poem i
wish lily to be.  too many dry books would only spoil the poem.'  and
you now see why i am so ignorant, and so unlike other girls, and why
mr. and mrs. emlyn look down upon me."

"you wrong at least mr. emlyn, for it was he who first said to me,
'lily mordaunt is a poem.'"

"did he?  i shall love him for that.  how pleased lion will be!"

"mr. melville seems to have an extraordinary influence over your
mind," said kenelm, with a jealous pang.

"of course.  i have neither father nor mother: lion has been both to
me.  aunty has often said, 'you cannot be too grateful to your
guardian; without him i should have no home to shelter you, no bread
to give you.'  he never said that: he would be very angry with aunty
if he knew she had said it.  when he does not call me fairy he calls
me princess.  i would not displease him for the world."

"he is very much older than you; old enough to be your father, i
hear."

"i dare say.  but if he were twice as old i could not love him
better."

kenelm smiled: the jealousy was gone.  certainly not thus could any
girl, even lily, speak of one with whom, however she might love him,
she was likely to fall in love.

lily now rose up, rather slowly and wearily.  "it is time to go home:
aunty will be wondering what keeps me away,--come."

they took their way towards the bridge opposite to cromwell lodge.

it was not for some minutes that either broke silence.  lily was the
first to do so, and with one of those abrupt changes of topic which
were common to the restless play of her secret thoughts.

"you have father and mother still living, mr. chillingly?"

"thank heaven, yes."

"which do you love the best?"

"that is scarcely a fair question.  i love my mother very much; but my
father and i understand each other better than--"

"i see: it is so difficult to be understood.  no one understands me."

"i think i do."

lily shook her head with an energetic movement of dissent.

"at least as well as a man can understand a young lady."

"what sort of young lady is miss cecilia travers?"

"cecilia travers!  when and how did you ever hear that such a person
existed?"

"that big london man whom they call sir thomas mentioned her name the
day we dined at braefieldville."

"i remember,--as having been at the court ball."

"he said she was very handsome."

"so she is."

"is she a poem too?"

"no; that never struck me."

"mr. emlyn, i suppose, would call her perfectly brought up,--well
educated.  he would not raise his eyebrows at her as he does at
me,--poor me, cinderella!"

"ah, miss mordaunt, you need not envy her.  again let me say that you
could very soon educate yourself to the level of any young ladies who
adorn the court balls."

"ay; but then i should not be a poem," said lily, with a shy, arch
side-glance at his face.

they were now on the bridge, and before kenelm could answer lily
resumed quickly, "you need not come any farther; it is out of your
way."

"i cannot be so disdainfully dismissed, miss mordaunt; i insist on
seeing you to at least your garden gate."

lily made no objection and again spoke,--

"what sort of country do you live in when at home; is it like this?"

"not so pretty; the features are larger, more hill and dale and
woodland: yet there is one feature in our grounds which reminds me a
little of this landscape,--a light stream, somewhat wider, indeed,
than your brooklet; but here and there the banks are so like those by
cromwell lodge that i sometimes start and fancy myself at home.  i
have a strange love for rivulets and all running waters, and in my
foot wanderings i find myself magnetically attracted towards them."

lily listened with interest, and after a short pause said, with a
half-suppressed sigh, "your home is much finer than any place here,
even than braefieldville, is it not?  mrs. braefield says your father
is very rich."

"i doubt if he is richer than mr. braefield; and, though his house may
be larger than braefieldville, it is not so smartly furnished, and has
no such luxurious hothouses and conservatories.  my father's tastes
are like mine, very simple.  give him his library, and he would
scarcely miss his fortune if he lost it.  he has in this one immense
advantage over me."

"you would miss fortune?" said lily, quickly.

"not that; but my father is never tired of books.  and shall i own it?
there are days when books tire me almost as much as they do you."

they were now at the garden gate.  lily, with one hand on the latch,
held out the other to kenelm, and her smile lit up the dull sky like a
burst of sunshine, as she looked in his face and vanished.




